[Amit Varma]: 2021 is behind us and 2022 is here. The end of a year, the beginning of another. How much
[Amit Varma]: significance does it have? A date is arbitrary after all, and there should be no difference
[Amit Varma]: between January 1 and say, September 4. But sometimes in our lives, the milestone of a
[Amit Varma]: date can be useful. Mentally, it can help us leave the past behind and start again.
[Amit Varma]: The last couple of years have been tough for most of us. I've experienced personal loss,
[Amit Varma]: seen my friends and family and everyone around me suffer, and at times it felt endless. The
[Amit Varma]: pandemic was more of a sheer trauma for this country than even the horrors of partition
[Amit Varma]: that was restricted to a few areas, while COVID entered every corner of this nation.
[Amit Varma]: I think every single Indian must know someone personally who died in this time. That is
[Amit Varma]: such a terrifying thought. But we have to move ahead. If we cannot live in hope, we
[Amit Varma]: cannot live at all. And one of the things that gives me hope is technology. I'm not
[Amit Varma]: just referring to medical science, which came up with so many effective vaccines and made
[Amit Varma]: this nightmare shorter than it would have been 10 years ago. I'm also referring to everyday
[Amit Varma]: tech, which has empowered individuals, especially individual creators. Creators today have the
[Amit Varma]: means of production in their own hands. They don't need intermediaries to reach their audiences,
[Amit Varma]: and there are no gatekeepers to tell them what they may not do. I've experienced this
[Amit Varma]: myself as a creator, and it's been a blessing. Now, along with the hope this may give us,
[Amit Varma]: we also need the willpower to do something about it, to not languish anymore, but snap
[Amit Varma]: out of our funk and get down to using our time in productive ways. I'm still figuring
[Amit Varma]: out how to do this. But I will learn and I will move forward. And I hope you do as well.
[Unknown]: Have a great 2022. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly
[Unknown]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Deepak Gopalakrishnan, also known
[Amit Varma]: as Chuck Gopal. Now I cannot introduce him in one sentence. He's a creator, humorist,
[Amit Varma]: cartoonist, an ex-advertising man, a digital marketing guru, a prolific podcaster, a prolific
[Amit Varma]: writer, a music maven, and a teacher and mentor to many. He's also learned a lot about productivity,
[Amit Varma]: especially through the latest of his podcasts, Getting Meta. So I thought it would be great
[Amit Varma]: to have Chuck on the show to share some of his insights on productivity, so that people
[Amit Varma]: like me could get cracking on our New Year resolutions right away. He came home to my
[Amit Varma]: home studio, we started talking, and we couldn't stop. We spoke for more than four hours on
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of subjects including music, the creator economy, comedy in India, advertising and
[Amit Varma]: digital marketing, and much, much more. Our conversation contained multitudes. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: this episode is probably too short because despite being podcasters ourselves, we did
[Amit Varma]: not speak at all about podcasting, maybe later in 2022. Before we begin this conversation
[Amit Varma]: though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I've learned most over the last year and a half is sharing my insights
[Amit Varma]: on my two greatest passions, writing and podcasting. And I'd love to invite you to be a part of
[Amit Varma]: this journey. Registration is now open for the January cohort of the Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: where over four webinars on four Saturdays, I teach all I know about the art and craft
[Amit Varma]: of writing compelling prose, much interaction, many exercises, and at the end of it, you
[Amit Varma]: get to join the Clear Writing community, an online community formed by the 18 previous
[Amit Varma]: cohorts of this course. In that community, we have book clubs, workshops, writing prompts
[Amit Varma]: with feedback and much else. I am also doing a special cohort of my podcasting course,
[Amit Varma]: the Art of Podcasting, which I had conducted for three cohorts last year before I took
[Amit Varma]: a break. All my learnings from five years of the seen and the unseen in three webinars
[Amit Varma]: over three Sundays. For more details and to sign up for my writing course, head on over
[Amit Varma]: to IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. To sign up for my podcasting course, go to seen
[Amit Varma]: unseen.in slash learn. These links will also be at the bottom of the show notes. These
[Amit Varma]: are exciting times for the creator economy, and I'd love to help you be a part of it.
[Guest]: Chuck, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you. It's an absolute pleasure to be
[Amit Varma]: here. I'll let my listeners know that when Chuck came here, he did we are recording this
[Amit Varma]: at my home studio. So he was offered two chairs. One is a lazy boy, one is a gaming chair,
[Amit Varma]: he took the lazy boy, and he was offered a free foot massage, not by any interns I have
[Amit Varma]: around for I have none but by this lovely machine that I have picked up, which my editor,
[Amit Varma]: the great Gaurav Chintamani of Advaita fame has actually sampled in such a way that he
[Amit Varma]: told me that listen, you want to do an episode with the foot massager on I'll just edit the
[Amit Varma]: sound clean out I've sampled that thing. But Chuck wasn't keen to get his foot massaged
[Amit Varma]: right at the moment. We'll come to it later. But let's start as I start all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: by asking the guest about the Beatles, which is slight googly there. But just before the
[Amit Varma]: recording, we were talking about the you know, get back the new documentary on the Beatles
[Amit Varma]: by Peter Jackson and the unseen footage and, and you had an interesting point to make about
[Amit Varma]: Sgt. Peppers. And I wanted to hear more of it, but it was time to start the recording.
[Guest]: So we've combined the two. So let's go. Perfect. So Sgt. Peppers is probably the Beatles most
[Guest]: well known album, jury is still out as to whether it's the best album that's up for
[Guest]: debate, of course, and most influential probably and because it changed the direction of music
[Guest]: and their careers in many ways. What I find interesting about it when and I love analyzing
[Guest]: things like this reading about rock history and just you know, doing what ifs with respect
[Guest]: to the history and all that is that if the Beatles started off that way, you know, super
[Guest]: experimental and all that I'm not sure whether rock history would be the same with a beat
[Guest]: whether the Beatles would be the same and all that before Sgt. Peppers and perhaps even
[Guest]: the two albums that preceded that, they built up a massive following on the back of doing
[Guest]: safe music, very good music, but still fairly safe music. And they built up a huge following
[Guest]: which meant that an experiment album like Sgt. Peppers had a wide audience to go with
[Guest]: rather than say somebody like King Crimson who comes right off the bat with the weirdest
[Guest]: possible stuff, which doesn't find that much of an audience, and they never went mainstream.
[Guest]: So I always think, what if Sgt. Peppers was the first or what are the Beatles discography
[Guest]: was actually reverse in some way. So yeah, I think about things like this once in a while.
[Amit Varma]: It's actually fascinating, because like first up, it's a great thought experiment, but it
[Amit Varma]: also leads me to the thought that it could not have been that way that they needed to
[Amit Varma]: go to Hamburg and play those months and then come back and do that safe music. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, they needed Please Please Me as their first number one and all of that interface
[Amit Varma]: to evolve to the point where, you know, Sgt. Peppers was even possible. And like, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: I think you're right, if Sgt. Peppers was it was their first album for some by some
[Guest]: freak reason. I think the history of music would have been different. Yeah. But to counter
[Guest]: one point you made Amit, which is the evolution from say, safe music. And by the way, we use
[Guest]: safe music in air quotes over here. So please don't troll both of us over here. The first
[Guest]: few albums sounded simple, but there's actually there's actually a fair bit happening over
[Guest]: there with respect to chord changes and all that. We set the even the early Beatles apart.
[Guest]: But if you look at even bands like say Genesis, yes, to some extent, they started off complex,
[Guest]: and then they became more poppy, if I may, it's a travesty that a progressive band like
[Guest]: yes, their most famous song is actually a fairly poppy number. And same with many of
[Guest]: the others, give weather now that's whether they're getting old or whether there's giving
[Guest]: into commercial mandates, whatever the case may be, the Beatles could have started off
[Guest]: the same way what they came up with, what if they came off the bat with a weird album
[Guest]: like Sgt. Pepper before George Martin and the executors at EMI sat down and said, please
[Guest]: make something that moves units. So, you know, again, all thought experiments, all the things
[Amit Varma]: that make sense when there's, I mean, yes, as a good example, even Fleetwood Mac started
[Amit Varma]: off bluesy with Peter Green and all and then they go into more poppy direction. I'm not
[Guest]: dissing the later direction. Yeah, it always treated as two completely different areas.
[Guest]: To me, they are not the same band before and after the Buckingham Knicks. I think to me,
[Amit Varma]: they're completely two different bands. And the other thing to consider is if the Beatles
[Amit Varma]: came with Sgt. Pepper first, would they have been allowed to record and release? Absolutely.
[Guest]: So that's another thing, right, Amit? And I like, let's jump from there into the modern
[Guest]: days. One of the things like, so I'm listening to a lot of Floyd right now, because I've
[Guest]: got a lovely new pair of headphones and what better band than Floyd to explore that on.
[Guest]: And one of the facts that always blows me away is that the album that made Floyd, The
[Guest]: Dark Side of the Moon was actually their eighth album. Yeah, right. Which is bang in the middle
[Guest]: of the discography. Actually, if you look chart, the discography is actually falls in
[Guest]: the second half of their career. Which band today would have the luxury of mucking around
[Guest]: for seven albums before finding quote unquote, their sound. So I mean, bands today are expected
[Guest]: to be great from the word go. Whereas if you look at some of the greatest bands in history,
[Guest]: they took a good three, four albums before eventually finding their sound, be it the
[Guest]: Deep Purples of the world, or be it many of the progressive bands, Floyd is the best example
[Guest]: of it, they needed to muck around for all that time before finding the sound. So again,
[Guest]: all just thought experiments, all just what ifs in the world of music, and that to just
[Guest]: rock music, not even the broader scene of pop, and all that. So yeah, I just love thinking
[Amit Varma]: about things like this. Yeah, I mean, a couple of threads come up from what you just said.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them goes back to something that Steve Van Zandt said, the E Street Band guitarist
[Amit Varma]: for Bruce Springsteen in an interview some time back where he said that rock is no longer
[Amit Varma]: mainstream. It was mainstream for like 30 years, mid 60s to perhaps when Nirvana came
[Amit Varma]: out with Sounds Like Teen Spirit. And after that, it's no longer part of the mainstream.
[Amit Varma]: And I look at entertainment today, it seems to me that one of the things that has happened
[Amit Varma]: in the last 30 years, and I don't think that rock not being mainstream is necessarily part
[Amit Varma]: of this phenomenon. I mean, the whole music industry is a separate thing with many other
[Amit Varma]: forces. But I think one of the things that has happened is that there is less and less
[Amit Varma]: that is actually mainstream, like there's a fragmentation of tastes, there's a fragmentation
[Amit Varma]: of genres, you know, like, I was mentioning on one of my earlier shows to someone that
[Amit Varma]: on YouTube, you know, we think YouTube is one thing, right? It has what it has, and
[Amit Varma]: everybody can access all of it. But it's interesting. So on YouTube, I have an algorithm, which
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I love the default algorithm, because it kind of gives me whatever stuff that I
[Amit Varma]: enjoy. But I wanted to enter some right wing rabbit holes to see what the hell is happening
[Amit Varma]: there. And I didn't want it to mess up my algorithm. So I opened incognito window, another
[Amit Varma]: Gmail account and entered that and now that's a different algorithm. That's the same algorithm,
[Amit Varma]: but it's serving up a completely different feed to me. And I realized that everybody
[Amit Varma]: actually gets completely different YouTubes because of the algo and that starts with the
[Amit Varma]: first choice you make. And then you go off in random directions. And similarly, I think
[Amit Varma]: in popular culture, there is this fragmentation of days. And I wonder if that means either
[Amit Varma]: the death of the mainstream, or the winnowing down of the mainstream to something that is
[Amit Varma]: very safe and cuts across like the whole Marvel movies kind of thread that's come down. I
[Amit Varma]: mean, most of Hollywood, mainstream cinema is you're just following those franchises.
[Amit Varma]: And otherwise, I think it's a golden age of cinema. Because if you look at independent
[Amit Varma]: cinema, and what's happening across the world is mind blowing the tools of production are
[Amit Varma]: open to independent filmmakers is great work happening out there. So in the context of
[Amit Varma]: music, which you follow closely, do you think that there's something to this? Like, do you
[Amit Varma]: look back and say that, like, when we grew up, there was a mainstream, you knew who the
[Amit Varma]: big bands were? Yeah. And they were damn successful, even if they weren't like your Michael Jackson
[Amit Varma]: or Madonna. And you also knew your Michael Jackson and Madonna and big pop artists who
[Amit Varma]: dominated the charts were, and it was really clear. Yeah. Do you feel that in some way
[Amit Varma]: that landscape has changed? And not, it's not necessarily a bad thing. You know, there
[Amit Varma]: are many more, there'll be many more niches, there'll be much more scope for different
[Guest]: kinds of art. Yeah. But what's your sense? No, I completely agree. So even if Okay, let's
[Guest]: take the micro example of say, rock music, right, and then you can pretty much extrapolate
[Guest]: that to any other form of art, really. And there are several reasons for this in the
[Guest]: early in the 70s, 80s and 90s, right, which is where a lot of bands were built. They were
[Guest]: built, and I think the word has to be used, they were marketed by record executives who
[Guest]: had who had to put more eggs in, in a fewer baskets. So you had bands like Kiss or even
[Guest]: to not not Nirvana, really, but even before that Van Halen, the all the bands of the 80s,
[Guest]: like Bon Jovi, etc, Def Leppard, all of these were incessantly marketed and hyped up by
[Guest]: the record labels, because they needed to succeed because they needed to move volumes
[Guest]: of physical product. And that, of course, started changing with respect to the internet
[Guest]: and all that changing tastes and everything. But what you're seeing now is fewer big artists
[Guest]: across the board, right, you may have some huge names, like say, a Taylor Swift or Beyonce
[Guest]: or whoever the, you know, Ed Sheeran's of the world who are guaranteed to sell out stadiums,
[Guest]: etc, wherever they go, but everywhere else, you are likely to have very tribal and for
[Guest]: once on this podcast, we may use tribal in a positive way in a good way. Very, very passionate
[Guest]: followings for very niche genres. For example, I am a huge fan of a genre called progressive
[Guest]: metal, I'm wearing the t shirt of a band called Ne Oblivisaris. And my objective of coming
[Guest]: on to the show, by the way, Amit was just to say Ne Oblivisaris on air, which is a progressive
[Guest]: metal band from Australia that uses a violin, right. So now people who like their genre
[Guest]: absolutely adore what they do. And when I say adore, what do I mean, it's not just about
[Guest]: buying the music. Yes, buying the music, buying the music, I have friends of mine who are
[Guest]: patreons of these guys and actually order vinyls and make it viable for a band to make
[Guest]: a living maybe not become superstars. I think that era is over. Unless of course, you're
[Guest]: aiming for the Ed Sheeran kind of music, but make enough of a living to continue doing
[Guest]: what they are touring to say, audiences of 200-300 across the world. That happens. And
[Guest]: I think that's happening across the board. There are platforms like say Bandcamp, which
[Guest]: allow musicians to put up their album for sale so that fans who connect with them enough
[Guest]: can actually buy the album, so that artists get more of the money. All these kinds of
[Guest]: things are happening. And I believe the same is true of not just other genres of music,
[Guest]: but across art, for instance, there are so many platforms for things like anime and specific
[Guest]: followers of certain kinds of visual design, for example. I think it's fascinating, though,
[Guest]: the way this fragmentation is happening, like you said, it is absolutely true. So and it's
[Guest]: a lot of factors, right? It's because of the changing imperatives of record labels, the
[Guest]: economics of streaming. One resource that I can give immediately for anyone who's interested
[Guest]: in this topic is there's a fantastic podcast called The Ongoing History of New Music. It's
[Guest]: by a Canadian journalist called music journalist called Alan Cross. And he delves into a lot
[Guest]: of this. Why are there no big superstars anymore in the in the space of music? Because of streaming,
[Guest]: what are the it's very interesting, what are the second order effects of things like that?
[Guest]: So absolutely fascinating, you know, very analytical look at music and its evolution
[Guest]: in a broader context and with the context of say, an individual band like say a Pearl
[Guest]: Jam or the Beatles or something like that. Even doing thought experiments like, okay,
[Guest]: if we take this band out of music history, how do things change? And those things are
[Guest]: fascinating because in the world of music is usually something very small or seemingly
[Guest]: small in the larger scheme of things that's led to a whole chain of things later. Like
[Guest]: for example, and heavy metal fans will know this, what if Tony Iommi never had that finger
[Guest]: accident, he would have never detuned his guitar, heavy metal would have sounded completely
[Guest]: different if at all birthed at all. So yeah, all these butterfly effects sort of things,
[Guest]: I think, work in the space of art more than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: The seen in the unseen as Tony Iommi's finger. I'm also struck by what you said about the
[Guest]: metal band you adore. What is this name? I'll also take the name and make your day.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a it's a band called Ne Oblivisaris.
[Guest]: Ne Oblivisaris.
[Guest]: Yeah, they're a band from Perth, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Ne Oblivisaris. So we'll link, we'll put relevant links in the show notes to Ne Oblivisaris.
[Amit Varma]: And something you said about them sparked off another thought where you said that their
[Amit Varma]: fans absolutely adore them. Yeah. And now I find that very interesting, because the
[Amit Varma]: other thing that I think has happened and tell me if you agree with this, is that earlier,
[Amit Varma]: you had these few big names would make it nothing for the long tail. And those few big
[Amit Varma]: names would yes, it would be worshipped by some at a distance. But for a lot of people,
[Amit Varma]: the engagement would be kind of shallow. You listen to them in the background, and that's
[Amit Varma]: it, you know. And what I find today is that when you go deeper and deeper into these kind
[Amit Varma]: of different niches, the absolute numbers go down, but the level of engagement goes
[Amit Varma]: up a lot. Like just in podcasting, you know, if you if I was to try to sell this podcast
[Amit Varma]: as a radio show back in 1995, obviously, there are no takers for a four hour conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Now today, and thankfully, the absolute numbers are also fairly decent right now. But the
[Amit Varma]: level of engagement is crazy, right? Which is something I noticed more and more with
[Amit Varma]: like a lot of the consumer that I follow the vlogs I watch or the music I listen to or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, I'm just way more engaged than I was at an earlier point in time. And this
[Amit Varma]: also leads me to thinking about, you know, you were musing about how Dark Side of the
[Amit Varma]: Moon was their eighth album, and they were already more than mid career. And in today's
[Amit Varma]: day and age, would they have got seven albums to do what they were doing? Now, I think one
[Amit Varma]: thing about music back in the day was that it was very record label dependent, it was
[Amit Varma]: dependent on big business, right? So tell me a bit about whether that has changed because
[Amit Varma]: my sense of the creator economy in general, is that these intermediaries and these platforms
[Amit Varma]: are irrelevant. Creators can directly reach users, they can directly build their community,
[Amit Varma]: they can directly monetize it monetize seems like a very cold word, but in the sense every
[Amit Varma]: community values the creators and, you know, that exchange can happen. Is that also true
[Amit Varma]: for music? Like how do musicians make their money? Like if Roger Waters and Dave Gilmour
[Amit Varma]: are sitting today and they're forming Pink Floyd, are they going to reach an eighth album?
[Guest]: If record labels aren't interested?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question. And I won't speak on behalf of the music industry, because
[Guest]: I am not completely sure how that entire dynamic sort of works. But one thing is absolutely
[Guest]: certain what you said, okay, let's take the hypothetical situation that the Pink Floyd
[Guest]: is, and I used the Pink Floyd, are an unknown entity right now, they've just got out of
[Guest]: wherever Cambridge and all that, and they have just started, they have just started
[Guest]: say mucking around. So what do they do, they create, say, a SoundCloud, or they put up
[Guest]: stuff on YouTube and things like that, there will be and even if you take Gilmour out of
[Guest]: the equation and go all the way back to early Floyd, so Syd Barrett and all that, and by
[Guest]: the way, if there's anyone who has no clue about what we're talking about, just just
[Guest]: know that the early Floyd albums were extremely experimental. And definitely not everyone's
[Guest]: cup of tea or saucer full of secrets. Just had to work that nicely done. I'm very proud
[Guest]: of myself for that. No, the thing is, I think even that weirdness would have found a niche,
[Guest]: I think they would have found an audience, as long as it stuck to what they were doing.
[Guest]: And they did it with some level of conviction. I think the I think weirdness has a way of
[Guest]: finding an audience in this day and age, right? As long as they continue doing this all sorts
[Guest]: of amazing content out there just a few weeks back. My wife introduced me to a channel hosted
[Guest]: by a Nepali graphic designer whose entire shtick is creating mock book covers and giving
[Guest]: random commentary while doing it. It is insanely compelling content. And one of the things
[Guest]: that we are binging right now is a pet groomer, giving the most colorful in the in the in
[Guest]: the good way, commentary while while, you know, grooming, grooming pets, like, it's
[Guest]: amazing to imagine that this is actually content, like if you take a step back and think about
[Guest]: it, like, groomers have been doing this for years for centuries, maybe. And this is now
[Guest]: she's crossed a million subscribers recently. And there's nothing outstanding about what
[Guest]: she does. She's very good at what she does. And it's weirdly compelling content. So to
[Guest]: go back to our hypothetical situation, as long as Gilmore and Waters or Barrett, whatever
[Guest]: that combination was, as long as they stuck to what they were doing, and that conviction
[Guest]: in it, and they found another bunch of weirdos to sort of go along with the ride, that would
[Guest]: definitely happen. I think, again, the community wouldn't be all that huge, but it would be
[Guest]: there. And given, you know, the internet, it's unlikely that they would stick to just
[Guest]: doing music, they may do something else that branches off into, they may do a weird podcast,
[Guest]: for instance, right, or create weird reels, or whatever the compulsions of the day are,
[Guest]: for them to maintain themselves, they would do something like that. And you can also be
[Guest]: sure that the moment they start becoming quote, unquote, popular, with echoes, dark side of
[Guest]: the moon, etc, you'll have those, you'll have many of the same guys saying, Oh, you guys
[Guest]: have sold out, and all that. So I'm very sure they would be able to make it. But again,
[Guest]: to what scale, not very sure they may be a much smaller brand, they may be like how I'm
[Guest]: talking about this band that possibly nobody else has heard of, for example. So it's very
[Guest]: interesting to think about how these things could happen. But one thing's for sure, I
[Guest]: don't think a record label would give them such a long leash of seven albums to find
[Guest]: the sound and even the sound that we're talking about is dark side of the moon, I don't think
[Guest]: dark side of the moon would have been would have made it as an album standalone today
[Guest]: to somebody who hasn't heard. Have you seen this movie called yesterday, by any chance,
[Amit Varma]: the hypothetical Beatles? I meant to see it, but I haven't. No, it's, it's, it's a good
[Guest]: watch purely for the concept, right? It's one of those movies that I would recommend
[Guest]: any Beatles fan watches, not expecting too much of the plot, but purely for the concept
[Guest]: of what if you woke up in a world where you remember all the Beatles songs, but the Beatles
[Guest]: never existed just to see what plays out with that fairly fascinating thought process. This
[Guest]: one scene in which and this is not a spoiler where he plays yesterday, right? And his friends
[Guest]: are around him. And everybody's jaws are dropping like, Wow, did you write that? And it's like,
[Guest]: yeah, I mean, but no, I mean, it's a, it's a Paul McCartney song, like who? And you know,
[Guest]: it goes and then it's one of the greatest songs ever written. It's a good song, but
[Guest]: it's not all that great. I mean, it's not, it's not Coldplay great. And then this guy's outreach,
[Guest]: but then you just step back for a moment. Yesterday is very huge, because not just because
[Guest]: of the quality of the song, but also what it means culturally, popularly and all that.
[Guest]: When somebody listens to Dark Side of the Moon today, they are going to have a recommendation
[Guest]: of somebody says, bro, you're listening to one of the greatest albums of all time. So you're
[Guest]: already coming in with some bias, right? What if you listen to Dark Side of the Moon, not knowing
[Guest]: it was one of the greatest albums of all time? How would your experience be different? I genuinely
[Guest]: do not know. One of the things I used to do while listening to music, and I have this habit of
[Guest]: listening to bands chronologically, I used to bias myself by reading a lot of reviews before jumping
[Guest]: into the album. So I knew what to expect. And I realized that colored by experience a lot.
[Guest]: And like, oh, the song that everyone says is great. I didn't think was all that great. So now
[Guest]: my new approach is listening to it first, and then going back and seeing whether and many of the
[Guest]: times like, wow, what a great song. This is didn't even get a passing mention on the review. So I
[Guest]: don't know where we started from over here. But could Gilmore and Waters continue making music?
[Guest]: If they started off today? I think they would, but I don't think they would be selling stadiums.
[Guest]: For sure. They would have a very strong Patreon base. But that's it. I don't think I think too
[Guest]: much has changed the way music is the also the era, right? I don't think that that acid fueled
[Guest]: kind of music, which was so 60s 70s would have worked in this sort of era. So many things put
[Guest]: together. So you learn that these thought experiments, there are several, there's a lot
[Guest]: of context behind success at one point of time, I guess that makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: No, it does. And you know, like, I think the good part about these thought experiments is that one,
[Amit Varma]: of course, are entertaining to talk about and argue about. But the other good part is they
[Amit Varma]: make you examine these contexts deeper. You know, I just think that maybe they would have made a
[Amit Varma]: different kind of music today. Maybe they would have made hip hop, you don't know, because they
[Amit Varma]: had a palette of sounds in their consciousness to work with. And from that palette, they create
[Amit Varma]: the particular music that they do. But today, they would have had a completely different palette of
[Amit Varma]: sounds to work with and would have worked with that. So you don't know where they're going.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, in one of the webinars for my writing course, I talk about Shakespeare. And
[Amit Varma]: the point I make is that that guy was a dude. If he was alive today, you know, he would have
[Amit Varma]: blown everybody out of the water. Because not only is it great art, but he was a box office
[Amit Varma]: superstar of his day. He was Yash Chopra plus Steven Spielberg plus Ed Sheeran, as you just
[Amit Varma]: mentioned, who I think is a really fine songwriter. I won't diss him just because he's popular.
[Amit Varma]: There's this great video I came across where he's talking about his Van Morrison influence,
[Amit Varma]: right. And Van Morrison is like my all time, whatever, just adore Van Morrison, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So Sheeran's talking about the Van Morrison influence. And it's like a 10-12 minute video,
[Amit Varma]: I'll play it. Then he talks about how he gets the idea for a song and his initial chords are very
[Amit Varma]: Van Morrissey when he plays them. But then he says how he changes it around a little bit to make it
[Amit Varma]: more Marcy. And it's one of his big hits, Thinking Out Loud, right, which is such a poppy song.
[Amit Varma]: But once you get that Van Morrison connection, you're like, wow. And then you think that, wow,
[Amit Varma]: this guy is serious. You know, he took that and he made it into this. I'll link that long video
[Guest]: from the show notes is really interesting. Just to but just to finish that, that thought
[Guest]: experiment of Gilmore and Waters making hip hop today, wouldn't it be amazing to think,
[Guest]: say Kanye West might have been a great guitarist back in the 60s or 70s.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. Like in my, in the webinar where I talk about Shakespeare, right at the end,
[Amit Varma]: I play Pink Floyd performing Shakespeare, which is actually not Pink Floyd. Pink Floyd is Dave
[Amit Varma]: Gilmore singing Shakespeare's Sonnet 18. Wow. And it's great, right. And I point them to another
[Amit Varma]: video, which is on YouTube, I think by this guy called Akala, where he's giving a lecture on hip
[Amit Varma]: hop. And at about the five minute mark there, he performs Sonnet 18 to hip hop. Wow. Right. So you
[Amit Varma]: realize a universality to what Shakespeare wrote, right? Because he really wrote the hardcore,
[Amit Varma]: simple language of his time. He really, you know, took the rhythms of everyday speech and
[Amit Varma]: wrote in that. And that's why he's so great. And this is like, I don't know if you've thought
[Amit Varma]: about this, you must have. While sort of thinking about all of this, I realized that, like number
[Amit Varma]: one, one of the points I try to underscore to my writing students, and I realized this, as I was
[Amit Varma]: putting together the course, I realized it even harder is that words, of course, have a music of
[Amit Varma]: their own, right? People are reading from a book, they think it's only visual, but they always
[Amit Varma]: sub vocalizing without realizing it, reading it out in their head. So words have a music of their
[Amit Varma]: own. Now, when it comes to songwriting, it's actually really interesting because the words
[Amit Varma]: have a music of their own. And then on top of that, you put music, right? And it's really
[Amit Varma]: interesting to then look at the great songwriters and see how they are doing their stuff and how
[Amit Varma]: the two come together. Like when Dylan is saying the answer, my friend is blowing in the wind,
[Amit Varma]: right? And everything there works so perfectly. It's not like Dylan thought consciously about it,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, blowing in the wind, you know, it's ending with that mute sound. He doesn't say the
[Amit Varma]: response comrade is wafting in the breeze. Yeah, you know, which is the example I give of bad
[Amit Varma]: writing, because all of those words we don't use in our everyday speech, but he's keeping it simple
[Amit Varma]: and having a powerful impact. The answer my friend is blowing in the wind and all the music just go
[Guest]: together and enhance. Absolutely. And yeah, absolutely. Because you also realize how
[Guest]: different songwriters approach music differently. Like there are some musicians who write the
[Guest]: lyrics first, I'm assuming Bob Dylan is one of those. You have others who think of the melody
[Guest]: first and then fit in words later. And sometimes those words could be absolute nonsense, because
[Guest]: they don't care about the lyrics all that much for them is more about the music. Noel Gallagher
[Guest]: of Oasis, one of my favorite bands is notorious for doing that the lyrics don't mean too much,
[Guest]: but it's really about the music, the cadence and all that. And then you even when you start digging
[Guest]: even deeper, one of the things that sets another one of my favorite bands Iron Maiden apart is
[Guest]: the they don't they don't sound like any other heavy metal band. And that's because their primary
[Guest]: songwriter happens to be a bassist, which is something that's very unique in the world of
[Guest]: rock and heavy metal. So you kind of realize how different songwriters approach, you know,
[Guest]: approach these things differently. And it's kind of it's kind of fascinating to think about this,
[Guest]: actually, you grow up listening to this music. And then, then once you're older and more mature,
[Guest]: and more mature, and you open up lyrics, you open up song meanings and genius.com for everything
[Guest]: that you do, for everything that you listen to, and then you say, Oh, oh, wow, okay, now this
[Guest]: makes sense. Okay, because it's happened. Okay, fine. It knowing this little tidbits, I think
[Guest]: just adds more to music. So anyone who is looking to rediscover music or something of that sort,
[Guest]: one thing I highly recommend is just open, just opening up the lyrics, even if you're not a lyrics
[Guest]: person, or opening up sites that give you what the meanings of the lyrics are. And for me, those go
[Guest]: to places are song meanings and genius, there's usually a lot of song facts, and all that, which
[Guest]: adds a lot of color to the, you know, music, the, especially for bands like the Beatles,
[Guest]: one thing I love about the Beatles is how all their songs are pretty much just based on
[Guest]: everyday ordinary, ordinary incidents. And knowing that just adds a lot more enjoyment to the music,
[Guest]: you can almost, you know, feel john channeling that story of, you know, whatever x person and
[Guest]: translating that into word, it's kind of, it's sort of like being in the studio with them when
[Amit Varma]: you put two and two together, which in fact, you are with Get Back, because one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: I was enjoying about the one and a half episodes I've watched so far, I'll watch the full thing
[Amit Varma]: is that they're constantly breaking into song playing old songs they wrote during the Hamburg
[Amit Varma]: days or song, they're doing random covers and all that. And there'll be some Beatles song where
[Amit Varma]: you can make out at one point, john is imitating Dylan. And the interesting thing is all of these
[Amit Varma]: takes would have actually been released had they been creators today, because they would have
[Amit Varma]: released everything. Whereas back in the day, the label is telling you, hey, album has x number of
[Amit Varma]: songs, you got to do those everything else goes out of the window, which is just such a great
[Amit Varma]: loss in the creative process. And Dylan, by the way, did write his lyrics first. I don't know,
[Amit Varma]: have you heard this album called the new basement tapes? No, I haven't. So I must admit, I'm not that
[Guest]: much of a Dylan fan, not because I dislike just that I never went there. Yeah. So the new basement
[Amit Varma]: tapes is basically these guys found Dylan lyrics that had never been turned into songs. So he'd
[Amit Varma]: written the lyrics first, like you correctly said, but he hadn't actually turned them into songs.
[Amit Varma]: So they gave it to contemporary songwriters and said, What can you do with this? Like Marcus
[Amit Varma]: Mumford did a lovely rendition of something called Kansas City. And it's really beautiful. So you
[Amit Varma]: have, you can actually in some of those videos, you can see the words in the original paper where
[Amit Varma]: Dylan has written them. And these guys were brought together and they were given three,
[Amit Varma]: four days or whatever. And they were cooped up and told, you know, and you can see the different
[Amit Varma]: things they do with it where and obviously a Marcus Mumford song is a Marcus Mumford song.
[Guest]: But with Dylan's lyrics, it's really interesting. Yeah. And I just wanted to add one more thing
[Guest]: over you. This is one thing that you're I've heard you say several times, which is the form
[Guest]: often dictates your content, right? And music is a great example of that there is this,
[Guest]: there are several studies showing that because of the Spotify era, right now,
[Guest]: how does Spotify pay artists, I mean, whatever they pay, it is after 30 seconds of streaming.
[Guest]: So I actually came across a band recently that makes music, which is between 30 and 35 seconds
[Guest]: each. So they just released a Beatles tribute album, which has 100 songs, all of which are
[Guest]: between 30 and 35 seconds. And the logic for that, hey, if Spotify is paying us for 30 seconds,
[Guest]: why bother making more? And it's hard to argue with that logic. Because you may say, Oh, back
[Guest]: in the day, people used to make 10 hour long sona or whatever. But back then, the imperatives were
[Guest]: different. Like even, I mean, you will find some equivalent of some heresy like this happening back
[Guest]: then itself, because they needed to fit it on an LP. Why fit it on recorded music, actual music
[Guest]: should be experienced live where you can play forever. So yeah, I think there's another
[Guest]: fascinating layer to add on top of that. And I think we should stop that discussion of music
[Guest]: over there. Otherwise, we'll go on talking about music itself, which is how the form dictates
[Amit Varma]: content. No, and this brings another thought to mind that, you know, there'll be these snobbish
[Amit Varma]: people who'll say, back in the day, we used to listen to albums, concept albums. And now people
[Amit Varma]: are just releasing singles and putting it out there. And what you pointed out is what you think
[Amit Varma]: of as an album and what you romanticize was dictated by how many songs you can actually
[Amit Varma]: stick on that damn thing called an LP. And each of the songs therefore is also dictated by,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what radios will play and all of that. So ultimately, 10 songs or four minutes each or
[Amit Varma]: whatever it is, is dictated by physical constraints. Why do we think of those old forms like
[Amit Varma]: even writers I remember, you know, so I've kind of wanted to write books on my life and not written
[Amit Varma]: any except one shitty one, but I'll redeem myself for that soon. But now when I think about it,
[Amit Varma]: I think why books? Why put that on a pedestal? Like if you're a writer, you had you have 800
[Amit Varma]: word articles, you can think of today 10,000 word long forms, short stories have certain lengths.
[Guest]: Seth Godin sends out a daily newsletter, which is 200 words. Yeah. And I find that fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. I mean, one of the things I realized while blogging is you can be, you know, 100 words,
[Amit Varma]: you can be 8000 words, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter. Why do we think in terms of format
[Amit Varma]: and what you just pointed out about music is, you know, 30, why not 35 seconds? Yeah, though I would
[Amit Varma]: hesitate. I know. I mean, I'm not dissing it, but that particular incentive that this is where we
[Amit Varma]: get paid, why do doesn't sit well with me, but I get the point they're making. Yeah, yeah,
[Guest]: I think it's more, it's more to make a point. And just one further thing on this music, on this
[Guest]: music and changing formats and all that. The biggest platform for music discovery these days,
[Guest]: at least for artists discovery for record executives in the US right now is actually
[Guest]: tick tock. And I'm guessing this is something that you that you know, it's, it's very interesting how
[Guest]: a song goes viral, for example, it may be because somebody converts it into a meme,
[Guest]: or it has me mobility. So now just imagine songwriters not just now have to change incentives
[Guest]: from okay, will it sound good on radio to okay, does it have a section in the lyrics where people
[Guest]: can do some silly dance or something so they can go viral on tick tock, so that etc, etc. So again,
[Guest]: a form dictates the content. And the second thing which I this, this I find really fascinating,
[Guest]: while we can sit and argue about whether rock is mainstream, hip hop is mainstream,
[Guest]: electronic is mainstream, music itself is getting it's behind kicked by this new thing called
[Guest]: gaming, which is what people youngsters are spending more and more of their time on. So
[Guest]: there's a lovely article headline I saw somewhere, I forget which website this was on probably
[Guest]: Wired or Fast Company or one of those, which is something like gaming is the new hip hop or
[Guest]: gaming. Gaming is basically this generation's rock music in terms of cultural relevance.
[Guest]: It has occupied cultural relevance. And I think with all this metaverse things that's going to
[Guest]: happen, it's just going to become even more, especially since we have a generation now
[Guest]: that's being bred on platforms like Roblox. So absolutely fascinating. And then where does music
[Guest]: come into this? Music is like, I think the future of music is more likely to be interactive
[Guest]: experiences, like say that Marshmello Travis Scott doing a virtual concert inside Fortnite.
[Guest]: I think the future is going to be something like that. And which just rips apart the concept of
[Guest]: music as an audio format by itself, right? Who said it needs to be just an audio format,
[Guest]: in some sense is going back to the time when music was performed live. And there was always
[Guest]: a visual element along with the audio. And then came along Edison with his ideas and stripped
[Amit Varma]: out the video part of it. This is mind blowing. Like I'm in my mid to late 40s. This is the first
[Guest]: time in my life. I love how you gave us a demographic. This is the first time in my
[Amit Varma]: life I heard the term Roblox. But instead of panicking as other people my age might do,
[Amit Varma]: I feel so fucking excited because what a time to be alive, right? Everything is changing.
[Amit Varma]: We'll segue from music because you're right that wasn't part of the plan to talk so much
[Amit Varma]: about music. And maybe it adds in some future date, who knows, I want to go back to the Beatles
[Amit Varma]: to use that to segue from it, which is I think of the Beatles hamburgers. And what they did in
[Amit Varma]: hamburgers, you would know is that they went there as a young band. And Ringo wasn't part
[Amit Varma]: of the group then. So they had Stuart Sutcliffe, I think playing bass, and they had Pete Best on
[Amit Varma]: drums. And so it was a five man outfit as far as I recall. And they just played every freaking night
[Amit Varma]: that they would play multiple times a day, they just played and played and played and played.
[Amit Varma]: And it was iteration, iteration, iteration, all before they had their first song 10,000 hours,
[Amit Varma]: 10,000 hours to the max. And so I'll segue from this. It's a good theme for me, because I think
[Amit Varma]: one of the big lessons I learned and this must be something I'm sure that you share is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people often think that you learn a craft and find you practice it. But then once
[Amit Varma]: you're in the public eye, you just you put out only your best work and whatever. And one of the
[Amit Varma]: things I've realized is that the road to excellence is through constant freaking iteration. Like one
[Amit Varma]: insight I like to sort of talk about, I might even have spoken about it on episode one of Getting
[Amit Varma]: Meta is from that Ali Abdaal video. Yes, yes, of course. Well, I mean, the basic lesson is and Ali
[Amit Varma]: Abdaal did this video when he reached 100 million subs, and he shared the graph of how his subs went
[Amit Varma]: up. And it was an exponential graph. And at episode 50, he pointed out when he did two episodes a
[Amit Varma]: week for 26 weeks for half a year, he reached 1000 subs, which is nothing right. And his advice
[Amit Varma]: to creators was that just make two videos a week for two years with 200 videos and don't look at
[Amit Varma]: your subs count and just do it just iterate. And that's exactly what the Beatles did. And people
[Amit Varma]: discovered that I think by accident when they're just kind of doing something doing something and
[Amit Varma]: because they love it, you know, karna hai, you know, like when you when anyone takes up a guitar,
[Amit Varma]: for example, they're not playing it because on day one, they think they're going to be Eddie
[Amit Varma]: Van Halen. On day one, if you listen to yourself, you know, you can't, you know, but then on day
[Amit Varma]: 8000, you get there, you get there. Yeah. So let's kind of talk about the creator economy in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that at like, what are your big sort of learnings from being a creator? Because I think
[Amit Varma]: all the learnings I've got from being a creator are really in the last three or four years,
[Amit Varma]: even sooner than that, during the podcasting journey, like I wasn't actually taking a step
[Amit Varma]: back and getting meta as it were, and thinking about this stuff, you know, I was just doing
[Amit Varma]: things. And gradually, things happened. And I, and at some point, I took a step back. And I said,
[Amit Varma]: this is interesting. And let's kind of connect all the threads. Tell me about that sort of
[Amit Varma]: compressed journey of yours of being a creator and thinking deeply about
[Guest]: Sure. So one, it's only recently that I've, that this term of creator has come up.
[Guest]: Yeah. We've been doing this. Oh, is that what it's called? Okay, I guess I'm a creator. Now,
[Guest]: if you put out a podcast,
[Amit Varma]: but actually love the term, because while it seems to put you in a box,
[Amit Varma]: it's a much bigger box and other boxes like writer, musician, filmmaker.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's, yeah, that's true, I guess. And there's also the connotation that you're
[Guest]: doing something related to the internet. I don't think a journalist would be called
[Guest]: as an old school journalist would be called a creator in that sense, although arguably,
[Guest]: they're doing way, way more meaningful creation in that sense. So with respect to quote, unquote,
[Guest]: content creation, I used to do random articles and cartoons, even from 2010 onwards, always
[Guest]: freelanced in some capacity or the other and just trying out various kinds of things. And then
[Guest]: podcasting came along the way, right, where I used to listen to a lot of the bugle at that
[Guest]: point of time, which is a hilarious show hosted by Andy Zaltzman. Primarily, it used to be co
[Guest]: hosted by John Oliver. And now of course, there's a rotating cast of comedians from around the world,
[Guest]: including a couple of our own including Anupal, etc. So I had this idea of doing a podcast,
[Guest]: but had no clue as to what I wanted to do. And through a series of accidents, which I'll spare
[Guest]: listeners, I started ended up starting Simplified with Naren, which again, we didn't have too much
[Guest]: of an idea of what we wanted, we didn't have too much of an ambition. And for us, it was just,
[Guest]: okay, let's try this out and see what happens. Because I was always keen on doing something with
[Guest]: Naren. And then it stuck, IBM threw us a lifeline. And I say lifeline, because we
[Guest]: we desperately needed discipline more than recording equipment at the time, we were putting
[Guest]: out episodes, which were which were like weeks, months apart. And finally, we managed to get some
[Guest]: sort of a cadence going. And then from there, two more podcasts came in, came along the way,
[Guest]: which are both individual shows. One is the origin of things, which is a short format show.
[Guest]: And the other, of course, is Getting Meta, for which you were, of course, very kindly the
[Guest]: first guest. And the name of the show, of course, came about during that first interview.
[Guest]: And this was pre-Facebook doing whatever they did. So kindly people, yeah, somebody heard the show.
[Guest]: Yeah. And along the way, a couple of other experiments happened as well. I started a
[Guest]: newsletter, I created a course of my own, I'm not sure whether that counts as content creation as
[Guest]: such. So here's the thing. So to answer your question, that was just to give you context to
[Guest]: answer the question that you had asked. I think all of these, I had absolutely no clue what I was
[Guest]: doing as I was going in. And I genuinely did not, I had no idea what the end outcome would be,
[Guest]: I had a reasonable idea of what my second and third podcast would be. But I did that I can say
[Guest]: that only because I had the confidence of having done 150 episodes from my previous show. Right?
[Guest]: So otherwise, everything I started like the newsletter for the first time, absolutely no
[Guest]: idea how this is going to turn out course as zero idea. I mean, when I started that course,
[Guest]: it was an idea that a friend gave me saying that will you take will you teach a few of us digital
[Guest]: marketing? I said, yeah, sure, I'll put some structure together and send it out to you guys
[Guest]: and see if it works for you. I expected 10 people. And in that first batch, there were I think 130 or
[Guest]: 140 people who signed up for it. And this was this was in 2020. For all of these, I just learned
[Guest]: along the way. And I think that is the only way to go as long as you're genuine, as long as you
[Guest]: are willing, as long as you are transparent about the fact that, hey, I might make mistakes,
[Guest]: but I will make up for it. And I will make sure that you get your money or times worth,
[Guest]: whatever the case may be. I think you're good, right? I think as long as you as long as you
[Guest]: don't over promise, whether you're selling, or whether you're asking people for their time,
[Guest]: which let's face it is probably way more valuable. I think you will be fine. I think you will be
[Guest]: fine. I think that's my one lesson of, you know, you call me a creator of being a creator, just
[Guest]: just start out, as you, you yourself said on the first episode of getting better, just start,
[Guest]: then let and iterate along the way. And as long as you are, you are either enjoying it,
[Guest]: or learning something, or ideally both, you will be fine. And six, give yourself a period of about
[Guest]: six months or something like that to figure out whether it's all working out, whether audiences
[Guest]: are reacting, whether you're getting what you wanted out of it. And it should be okay. Because
[Guest]: what another thing I've also realized is that content creation in and of itself, doesn't
[Guest]: necessarily need to be the end goal, like that could act as signaling for something else. For
[Guest]: example, I have a paid digital marketing newsletter, it's not exactly a digital marketing
[Guest]: newsletter, but on the periphery. Now, the fact that I run a newsletter is on something related
[Guest]: to marketing is enough for some people to think that I might be able to help them out with respect
[Guest]: to consulting, right? So doesn't matter whether they read what I write or not, it acts as signaling
[Guest]: in some sense, for the fact that, hey, okay, if you're able to take a course on marketing,
[Guest]: then you should be able to help me out with the problem my startup is having got many people
[Guest]: writing to me for that. I've got many people writing, take the course and said, Yeah, your
[Guest]: course and all is fine. But here's the stuff that I actually need your help for. That's happened a
[Guest]: lot. So that's another learning for me that the content creation. Yeah, it's nice if you get to
[Guest]: a million subscribers, or, you know, whatever number of views listens, whatever, but what,
[Guest]: but what does it play for your life or your if I may use the after abuse, the phrase personal brand
[Guest]: in the long run, I always think that these content pieces that somebody creates is just one part of,
[Guest]: you know, something larger. So I think these two would be broadly some lessons that I have learned.
[Guest]: Everything else is just a little too raw, I guess, for me to share. But I'm just having fun,
[Guest]: trying out various kinds of things. And I think it's an extremely exciting time to
[Guest]: have ideas and just put them out to the world. Really, if there was advice that I would give
[Guest]: anyone, I'll just build on what you said, which was very succinctly just start, take something
[Guest]: that you are good at doing, and mix it with something that you are interested in or learning
[Guest]: about or curious, etc. So for example, you might be a good writer, you might be interested in say,
[Guest]: finance, or you might want to learn more about something, right? Or you might have experience
[Guest]: doing something, right? So suddenly, when you put these equations together, you'll find that there
[Guest]: are lots of permutations and permutations and combinations. And on top of this, if you add a
[Guest]: layer of what I like to call treatment, funny, serious, long form, whatever it is, right?
[Guest]: Analyze some of your own favorite content creators and the stuff that they're doing and see where do
[Guest]: they fall in this? Are they the, there's one phrase that I love, I don't know whether I heard
[Guest]: it on your podcast or whether it was on somebody else's, but figure out what your role is in the
[Guest]: story. I absolutely love that line. It's not mine, but I love the line. Yeah, it's great. And I think
[Guest]: it was, it was said in the context of journalism, right? When you are a journalist, or when you're
[Guest]: a writer, who are you? Are you the peer of the reader, who is trying to figure out the story
[Guest]: along the way, which a lot of podcasts say like Freakonomics would be that way. Dubner is not
[Guest]: an expert, he is learning as he interviews his guests. And I think that's a lovely way of going
[Guest]: going at it. Or are you the expert? Are you say a Reid Hoffman, who has spent years cutting his
[Guest]: his cutting his teeth, and now is pontificating to the world. If you have that, who am I in the
[Guest]: story, merge that with the skill that you have and a possible treatment that you want to take,
[Guest]: you can come up with all kinds of ideas. The internet is full of crazy ideas that work, but
[Guest]: on paper, they look like they shouldn't make sense. A few few months back, my wife introduced
[Guest]: me to this Instagram account called Miss Excel, M-I-S-S-E-X-C-E-L. It is and I kid you not,
[Guest]: a Instagrammer who teaches Excel hacks while dancing to EDM. Nothing in that sentence sounds
[Guest]: like it should make sense. She recently made six figures in one day in US dollars. Wow. On the
[Guest]: because this created enough of a signal for her. I'm guessing nobody follows her for her. Oh, I
[Guest]: should learn Excel from this person. What they do follow her for is super quirky is funny. You're
[Guest]: signaling the fact that yeah, I'm a cool person who knows Excel. So you're part of that thing.
[Guest]: But what she does do is because she's built herself up in this way. She has a serious course
[Guest]: for $299 on learning Excel. I'm guessing that's not taught through EDM. I'm guessing that's
[Guest]: a proper thing. But what a great way to market a course, even if that wasn't the end outcome.
[Guest]: And as a result of that, and her fame has led to workshops and all that, and she can charge a
[Guest]: premium now that she's well known, and she has a personality and all that, that's helped her make
[Guest]: money. So just think about it. Somebody who's creating funny content around TikTok, funny
[Guest]: treatment, Excel being the space that you are familiar with, and dancing, which you are good at
[Guest]: all three of those look like a combination that shouldn't make sense. But somehow in the digital
[Guest]: age, it just does. Think about all the other combinations that are out there, you may be great
[Guest]: at cricket. Now, you may be very interested in cricket, what is your skill? Are you good on
[Guest]: screen? Are you a good writer? Are you great at tweets, TikTok, whatever the case may be.
[Guest]: And then think about treatments, funny, serious, etc, etc. There are just so many combinations to
[Guest]: be made. So when you look at it from this perspective, the sheer spectrum of things that
[Guest]: could be created, it's an insanely good time to have an idea or just get started. That's number
[Guest]: one. Now on the other side of things, and this is something I've very often thought about, so many
[Guest]: we say, right, so many things have changed, right? The platforms have changed, the opportunities
[Guest]: have changed, the monetization career options have changed, people become millionaires streaming
[Guest]: themselves playing video games or crying out loud, we live in an era like that, for example.
[Guest]: But what has not changed fundamentally is the amount of time people have, right? It's not like
[Guest]: 24 hours has magically become something as if anything because of hustle culture and all that,
[Guest]: the time to consume content has become lower, smaller and smaller, no matter whether it's
[Guest]: coming from a network, no matter whether it's something that the TikTok famed TikTok algorithm
[Guest]: throws up, whether it's something your friend said, whether it's a podcast that your friend
[Guest]: has started, whatever the case may be, all this burgeoning amount of content that's out there,
[Guest]: because you know, thriving, hashtag thriving, hashtag content creator economy, all that,
[Guest]: there is increasingly less time to consume all of it. And somehow in a weird kind of way,
[Guest]: I feel it's going to go back to some form of gatekeeper at some point of time. We always say,
[Guest]: oh, content creator, creator economy is awesome, because we're like, no, no longer are we in the
[Guest]: strangled stranglehold of the gatekeeper, like going back to our conversation, how we started
[Guest]: this. Musicians are free to explore themselves creatively, creatively without worrying about
[Guest]: what the record label says. We are free of the tyranny of the of the middleman or the gatekeeper
[Guest]: as it were. But what do you do when there are now 5000 bands vying for your attention instead of
[Guest]: two, you need some filter right over there. Before that used to be a record label who would do the
[Guest]: job of that. But now it could be some somebody else now might might be the Spotify top 20 metal
[Guest]: songs playlist, or it could be your trusted friend who is the who is inadvertently acting
[Guest]: as a gatekeeper, or it could be a publication. One very interesting thing I saw recently,
[Guest]: I follow this author called Charlie Wurzel, he writes this beautiful newsletter called Galaxy
[Guest]: Brain on the intersection of technology, culture, business and, and all that. He had a thriving
[Guest]: newsletter for a while. And recently he got, quote unquote, acquired by the Atlantic. Right?
[Guest]: I think we're going to see a lot more of this happening. Like even if you see the New York
[Guest]: Times, look at the number amount of talent that they're just swooping up, right? Kara Swisher,
[Guest]: or, you know, lots of those podcasts. And I think somehow, this so much content creation and
[Guest]: creators that's happening, it's become sort of like a Wild West, which is romantic to some extent,
[Guest]: until you realize that boss, you have only 24 hours in a day. And there's only so much content
[Guest]: you can create, I need somebody to curate this for me, curate equal to middlemen in some way or the
[Guest]: other. Now, whether that goes back to being the traditional gatekeepers with all their pros and
[Guest]: cons, or whether it is a new era, I think that's inevitable. I think that's a cycle that is going
[Amit Varma]: to happen. So yeah. So number of points. I mean, this is so fascinating. The last 10 minutes when
[Guest]: you were speaking, I'm going to listen to it again and again. No, no, I'm thanking you. Don't say
[Amit Varma]: okay, you say sorry. It's like thank you. Sorry is the most weird. So thread number one is gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: like I both agree and disagree. I, I agree that we need a way to filter the universe of content out
[Amit Varma]: there. But what I do think is that the gatekeepers of old have become irrelevant and are dying. And
[Amit Varma]: I think that's a great thing. Now, for example, back in the day would miss Excel who wants to
[Amit Varma]: dance to ADM while doing Excel ever have got a gig for whatever any TV channel any, you know,
[Amit Varma]: wherever that kind of content would feature. And the answer is clearly no, she would be laughed
[Amit Varma]: out the door. But today, you have acted as a gatekeeper. Like let's say you you are someone
[Amit Varma]: whose words I take really seriously on new content to follow, right? You have acted as a gatekeeper
[Amit Varma]: for me, and I'm going to go there and I'm going to listen to it. And people who are listening to
[Amit Varma]: this episode of the scene in the unseen are going to click there from the show notes. So in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: we are gatekeepers. So what's happening is that you don't have that one height bound gatekeeper
[Amit Varma]: who thinks in a particular way and follows convention, you have many, many gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: to choose from many ways. And I would therefore say that they're not really gatekeepers,
[Amit Varma]: they're arbiters of taste in a way, in the sense that they are helping you and you choose your
[Amit Varma]: arbiter of taste or gatekeeper or whatever term you kind of want to use. And I think I think that's
[Amit Varma]: fantastic. Because the point is, she can get her work out there today that would not have been
[Amit Varma]: possible 20 years ago, I can do a five hour conversation today not have been possible
[Amit Varma]: 20 years ago. Of course, my doing a five hour conversation today depends on your willingness
[Amit Varma]: as well and your stamina. Have you had your energy bars? But the other interesting thought
[Amit Varma]: that kind of struck me about content is, you know, when, again, you were talking about Miss Excel,
[Amit Varma]: and it's fascinating, because in a number of ways, she's following, actually, what I would consider
[Amit Varma]: principles that creators should follow that are not radical, right? Her work is radical. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: but what are those principles to me, and I'm kind of thinking aloud, and I'm gonna get getting a
[Amit Varma]: little meta here. But one of those principles is authenticity, that you got to be true to yourself,
[Amit Varma]: if you try too hard to fill a particular gap in the market, or to be somebody else, or whatever
[Amit Varma]: doesn't work, right, you got to be true to yourself. She's being true to herself, because she
[Amit Varma]: knows Excel, she loves dancing, I presume she loves EDM, which is where this comes from. And
[Amit Varma]: it works because she's having a great time doing it. Number two is that you don't have to be a
[Amit Varma]: spectacular expert in something to do content on it. Like I taught a podcasting course briefly,
[Amit Varma]: and people and you know, students would ask me that why should somebody listen to my podcast,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not an expert in anything. And I'm like, No, but the point is that you are on some kind of
[Amit Varma]: journey, maybe an intellectual journey, maybe a journey through life, which many other people have
[Amit Varma]: in common. So it makes your journey so relatable, as long as you're, you know, true to yourself,
[Amit Varma]: again, that being the primary condition, it makes it so relatable, and interesting and entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a similar thing with this lady, who may not be the best Excel teacher in the world,
[Amit Varma]: but is I'm sure is perhaps the most successful now from what you say, possibly, possibly,
[Amit Varma]: because she wasn't shy of going out there and, you know, putting herself out there. She didn't
[Amit Varma]: say am I the greatest Excel expert? No, no self doubt, I just go out there and do it. And the
[Amit Varma]: third one which comes from that is intimacy, that all the creators are like, I feel like I know
[Amit Varma]: these people, right? Like I just released an episode with Abhinandan Sekri. And somebody
[Amit Varma]: wrote in to me to say that I felt I was I felt so much like I was sitting at a sofa in a drawing
[Amit Varma]: room with you guys, that at one point I interrupted before I realized that wait a minute, I'm not
[Amit Varma]: actually there. Right? And that's such a lovely comment. That's what creators want. And that's
[Amit Varma]: what all creators kind of get that you build those sort of intimate spaces where you feel you know
[Amit Varma]: the person so you know, Miss Excel, ticking the box on all of those and even you know,
[Amit Varma]: NYT going to big creators and taking them and all of that I get where that comes from. But at the
[Amit Varma]: same time you have say Yasha Monk starting persuasion on Substack and saying I'll do my own thing and
[Amit Varma]: many many people just kind of doing their own thing like Miss Excel will never feel the need
[Amit Varma]: to join a conglomerate because if she's made six figures in one day, fuck you, I'll do my thing.
[Amit Varma]: You know, why should I let someone else dictate content tomorrow instead of dancing to EDM she
[Amit Varma]: might want to do something else. But her boss will say no that worked for us. Dance to EDM.
[Amit Varma]: That's all pretty fascinating. That role in the story bit is also interesting. So tell me
[Amit Varma]: something while you were telling me about how you would advocate to people that think about your
[Amit Varma]: role in the story. And you said that look at content create, look at your favorite content
[Amit Varma]: creators and break it down. Did you at any point reverse engineer what other content creators are
[Amit Varma]: doing? And you know, get insights from that? Interesting question. And I have to say no,
[Guest]: you know, I think this is something that I realized post facto, I sort of took some lessons away from
[Guest]: some of the shows that I listen to always. And like, apart from the content itself, what makes
[Guest]: this work? That's something I always think about, right? Which is like, like what you said right
[Guest]: now? Yeah, sure. This Miss Excel's content work works because she enjoys 123 whatever. But how
[Guest]: can I take a lesson out from there and apply it to an other field which is completely unrelated?
[Guest]: How do I break these things down to to use one of our favorite phrases first principles? How do I
[Guest]: go back to what is the meta lesson that I can take away from here, which I can apply to something
[Guest]: else, which could be completely different. And I think that's the sort of skill I acquired,
[Guest]: if I may use the phrase, while I was working in advertising for some time to extracting
[Guest]: why this example works, and then transposing that to another brand in another category, etc.
[Guest]: But no, to answer your question, not really, I never thought of it that way. I guess,
[Guest]: now that, you know, we're sitting and thinking of content, I, if I were to give advice to somebody
[Guest]: today, they have, the thing is this, I think everybody today has enough of a frame of reference
[Guest]: from their own life, in order to draw enough of an example for for themselves to create content.
[Guest]: When I teach students, for instance, since you always say students of my course, let me be
[Guest]: another person who says that. So one of the things I start off and I teach a bunch of
[Guest]: undergraduate kids at a university, I tell them, see, listen, even if you sleep through all my
[Guest]: classes, all you need to do is this, you are subject to a lot of advertising on a daily basis,
[Guest]: have an opinion on them, ask at the other end of that ad, which I blocked or email that I deleted,
[Guest]: there was some brand manager who paid somebody a lot of money for that to reach you, right?
[Guest]: You may not be an expert in advertising yet or marketing yet or whatever, but you are an expert
[Guest]: as cheesy as this may sound at being you, right? Somebody did something in order for this ad,
[Guest]: email, whatever it is to reach you. You be the ultimate, you are the ultimate judge of whether
[Guest]: that works for you or not. If it does not work, or even if it works, why? Just ask yourself that,
[Guest]: reflect on that. And then you automatically will feel yourself becoming a better marketer or start
[Guest]: thinking that way. Why didn't you swipe up on that Instagram ad? Why did you delete that email?
[Guest]: HDFC Bank desperately wanted you to open an FD with them, but you deleted it. Why did you delete?
[Guest]: Did they target the wrong person? Did they use the wrong kind of message? Are you tired of them
[Guest]: incessantly spamming? Don't you trust them? You just got four great points that the CMO of HDFC
[Guest]: Bank would love to know. Thinking like this, I think always works. Similarly, it works kind of
[Guest]: similar with content. I think everyone consumes enough content to just reflect on them enough.
[Guest]: Why do I like these pieces of content? What makes this content tick? Why do I like some content that
[Guest]: is entertaining, something that's useful, something that's close to my heart, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Take all these sort of lessons, and then you'll like mishmash them, make your own framework,
[Guest]: and then you'll realize that there is, hey, okay, if I look at it this way, I can create x content
[Guest]: in this way on this platform around English football, for instance, because I'm passionate
[Guest]: about it, nobody else is doing it or whatever. So that's the way I look at it now. But I have to
[Guest]: admit a lot of this is very post facto, and not exactly something that I thought of, when I was,
[Guest]: you know, getting into it, which is why my other piece of advice is just jump into it and
[Guest]: figure it out, figure it out later. There are a lot of things that I don't like about Mark Zuckerberg.
[Guest]: But the one thing that he did say that I thought made absolute sense was, and I actually not quite
[Guest]: sure whether he said this, if you ship the perfect product, you've waited too long. And I thought
[Guest]: that was a lovely way to some, I mean, he said in the context of a product. But I think that works
[Guest]: for content as well. If you if your first episode is really, really good. Either you're very good,
[Guest]: but then even you being really good is possibly because you've done so many things before.
[Guest]: Faye D'Souza's first Instagram thing would have been great. Because she's kind of familiar with
[Guest]: doing that. Yes, the format is different, the orientation is different and all that. But
[Guest]: she's comfortable. She's a journalist for so long. And she's comfortable speaking in front
[Guest]: of a camera. It's not like she's gone off and started a fiction novel or something that would
[Guest]: be, you know, something different. So yeah, I think that's the way I think about these things.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And the image that came to my mind, and it's not a very good metaphor, but I'll say it
[Amit Varma]: anyway, is like, you and I are kind of like, we are learning to run while a tiger is chasing us.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So of course, there's no tiger chasing us per se. But the point is that if you just try to
[Amit Varma]: intellectually figure out what is a perfect way to run, you'll just sit there and become
[Guest]: But in the context of product, you could say tiger capitalist chasing you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. So the other point from your wonderful 10 minute monologue before this,
[Amit Varma]: another point that I wanted to pick up on was creator where you said that I teach a course,
[Amit Varma]: and I don't know if that would be called creating. So again, I'm kind of thinking aloud,
[Amit Varma]: because you're making up the rules as we go along. There's a tiger chasing us to learn to run
[Amit Varma]: is that if I might take a shot at trying to define a creator just for myself, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whether others agree with it, I would say a creator is someone who has some knowledge or skill,
[Amit Varma]: which they share with the world by creating something, right. And to distinguish it from
[Amit Varma]: products and all I'll just say that something isn't a physical thing, but that they share with
[Amit Varma]: the world in some way. So whether you're putting out music, whether you're doing a podcast, whether
[Amit Varma]: you're teaching a course, there's something inside you that you have that can be of value to others,
[Amit Varma]: and you put it out there. And you're automatically in that sense, a creator. And this brings me to
[Amit Varma]: another thought like this, dear filmmaker friend of mine, and he was sitting right where you were
[Amit Varma]: sitting on this lazy boy, not getting a foot massage also, because I didn't have the foot
[Amit Varma]: massager then. And he's around my age, and I felt kind of bad for him. And he was kind of low
[Amit Varma]: because he made a short film once which won a lot of Film Festival Awards and got him offers from
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood bigwigs who he became friends with. And they said, do this for us do that for us. He said,
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I have one dream film. I want to make that first. I want that to be my entry. We know how
[Amit Varma]: the story normally goes, right guy grows old film never happens, or he gives in. Well, guess what
[Amit Varma]: he made the freaking film. He made the film eight years ago, but after making it for all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: reasons, it never got released. So he's made his dream movie. He likes the way he made it. Everything
[Amit Varma]: has happened. Aad saal kuch nahi hua. And so he was sitting here bemoaning dad and telling me and
[Amit Varma]: every every meet about once a year where he'll kind of come to Andheri and he'll call me up and
[Amit Varma]: he'll say aaja hoon kya and I'll say aaja yaar. So and it's kind of the same lament. And this time
[Amit Varma]: I told him that boss, this won't do. The point is, if you think about yourself, and this is kind of
[Amit Varma]: me talking to you, that if you think about yourself, you're in your late 40s, you probably have
[Amit Varma]: 15 years of productive life to go when your cognitive energies are functioning properly
[Amit Varma]: for you to do something, right? After that, you're gone. It's a waste. I mean, of course,
[Amit Varma]: I know life is meaningless, we all die. But apart from that, if you want to make something of it,
[Amit Varma]: after that is gone. So my thing was ki abhi reconfigure the way you think about creation
[Amit Varma]: and the way you think about films and the way you think about art, you know, you have tons of and
[Amit Varma]: he's an FTII grad also. So you have tons of knowledge about how to make a film, how to write
[Amit Varma]: a film, he's written a book on script writing, which hasn't yet gotten released, how to make a
[Amit Varma]: film, how to write a film, you've got all of that knowledge, freaking do something, start a YouTube
[Amit Varma]: channel, it'll cost you nothing. Yeah, you don't need gatekeepers. You don't need one year producer
[Amit Varma]: saying no, yeah, well, hey, yeah, well, hey, you know, just make something every freaking day,
[Amit Varma]: because otherwise what you have is going waste. Like I'm sure every single person listening to
[Amit Varma]: this has something that other people can benefit from. Absolutely. What are you doing with it?
[Amit Varma]: Right. And so this is just something that I felt so strongly about, I felt I have to share it
[Amit Varma]: because it broke my heart to see the guy. Once a year, he comes every time he's screaming.
[Amit Varma]: My film is not getting released. And I'm like, leave it. You know, it will be released, it's not in your hands.
[Amit Varma]: But you can't let the next 15 years go in a lament. And then you say no, I'll start a YouTube channel.
[Amit Varma]: And then you realize you're fucking senile and your brain cells aren't working. Right. So my next
[Amit Varma]: question is about since you have kindly allowed me without contradicting me to put teaching as part of
[Guest]: creating. Which makes sense, by the way. Yeah, I think, yeah, on many levels, you can,
[Guest]: there are also a lot of lessons from the world of entertainment, I suppose, that teachers
[Guest]: could utilize. But yeah, I think I will agree with you on that teacher. Yeah, at least to some
[Guest]: extent, they can be called creators, I guess. Byju's and all, they're searching for, I mean,
[Guest]: the same sort of, I mean, the same challenge that Netflix has, you can say that Byju's also has,
[Guest]: they are also searching for, quote unquote, creators and compelling content, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like, what are you and I doing when you and I teach our course, we are actually telling stories
[Amit Varma]: around micro stories around the concepts you want to teach. And we're not literally telling story
[Unknown]: stories. But you're building a certain narrative. My next question for you kind of regards that,
[Amit Varma]: do you feel that that act of teaching, in a sense, forced you to get meta and think conceptually
[Amit Varma]: about the stuff you're teaching in the sense did teaching make you a better practitioner?
[Guest]: Oh, absolutely. Like, there is no doubt about that. You know, Amit, so I have taught at various
[Guest]: levels. And this is not really a flex as much as it is just, you know, happy accidents, there's all
[Guest]: these, these teaching things ended up ended up being, I've taught at an MBA level, I've taught
[Guest]: at an undergraduate level, and I have taught at a working professional level, which is a course I
[Guest]: ran for myself. Out of these three, which one do you think was the toughest to teach?
[Unknown]: Tell me.
[Guest]: The undergraduate one. Yeah, right. Because kids have an annoying habit of getting to the root of
[Guest]: the problem and asking very, very fundamental questions. Right? So you're saying, oh, okay,
[Guest]: you should do x kind of branding and not or whatever the case may be, their question,
[Guest]: why bother doing branding at all? So you know, they ask very, very fundamental questions,
[Guest]: which forces you to so this happened to me a couple of times. And then I said, Okay,
[Guest]: I can't fluff around with these guys. fluff flies in the boardroom, I can faff around with my client
[Guest]: or my this thing, because that's the way the industry works. And we can rant about advertising
[Guest]: later. The entire industry survives on gas. And this is joke that you have to get an MBA is just
[Guest]: to understand other MBAs. And there's a lot of truth in that. But when you're teaching undergraduates
[Guest]: students, you suddenly have to or even younger, that will be even more challenging. You really
[Guest]: need to ask fundamental questions, you not only need to simplify your content, but that's the
[Guest]: thing, simplifying your content is actually tougher. Because now you need to really get down
[Guest]: to the roots of things. And you need to ask yourself, okay, is this really needed? What is the
[Guest]: framework that will cover all of this? So to answer your question? Yes, absolutely. I think
[Guest]: that whole process of teaching and again, now this is irrespective of which level it was,
[Guest]: it forces me to become a better, better practitioner, because it is also a subject,
[Guest]: I teach marketing. So it's not it's, it's not a theoretical subject in many ways, at least I try
[Guest]: not to make it I try to use as many real examples as as possible. It forces you not just to brush up
[Guest]: on the basics, but get better, but constantly evaluate and like if I come across an example
[Guest]: today, right? If I like on the way to your house, if I see a billboard or something like is that
[Guest]: consistent with what I am teaching? Is that consistent with how I think about marketing?
[Guest]: Again, breaking down to first principles pretty much over there. If something contradicts, now
[Guest]: do I need to change something? Or this is an exception? Or should I add something else to the
[Guest]: framework? This happens all the time. And I like where the stuff that I'm teaching at is at right
[Guest]: now, I feel reasonably confident of presenting it to a bunch of 16 year olds. And let me tell
[Guest]: you, I mean, there's nothing scarier than going to a bunch of 16 year olds and telling them I'm
[Guest]: going to teach you how to use Instagram. There's nothing scarier than that. Uncle sit down. Oh,
[Guest]: seriously. And that's the thing. It constantly forces you to to get better. I think it's become
[Guest]: more fulfilling because because of that, I think both feed off each other. The teaching helps the
[Guest]: because when you teach you one, this is another thing I've realized when I put that course and
[Guest]: all that together, a lot of it, it's not like I had these models and frameworks and all that.
[Guest]: And immediately it was just a matter of spilling them out onto slides. If I want to take, say,
[Guest]: a session on, say, the like how video is being used in marketing, for example, I'll have a broad
[Guest]: idea of like, what are the endpoints that I want to get to? And I'll have, say, hundreds of examples
[Guest]: in the middle. But to make sense of all of it, you need to simplify it down somewhere to a
[Guest]: framework. And then bingo, you find yourself creating a framework that didn't exist, at least
[Guest]: in your slides five hours back. And, you know, that sort of thing is fascinating. And then you
[Guest]: say, Oh, if I'm using this for video, I can apply the same thing to something else and something
[Guest]: else. And then suddenly you find more of these frameworks getting together, which becomes an
[Guest]: even larger framework. So I think this whole, it's discovery. And it's for me, it's been extremely
[Guest]: fulfilling doing something like that. I totally understand now why teachers my mom's a teacher.
[Guest]: So like, when they say that teaching is extremely fulfilling, not just is it like the selfless part
[Guest]: of it, I suppose, which I always found, to be honest, a little overrated, the giving back part
[Guest]: of it, but it just forces you to become better. So yeah, absolutely. To answer your question,
[Amit Varma]: like I did an episode with our mutual friend Krish Ashok, who's also been on your show,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, another terrific episode. And one of the things Ashok kind of said was about the pyramid
[Amit Varma]: of learning. Yeah, right. That your learning is fairly shallow, if you know, you're just reading
[Amit Varma]: something, it's a little deeper if someone's telling you about it, but it is the deepest
[Amit Varma]: when you have to teach it. Yes. And I would say in a sense, writing about it is also pretty deep.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. And like, I keep telling my students that don't think that the connection between clear
[Amit Varma]: writing and clear thinking is a one way connection. Like, obviously, everyone who's a clear
[Amit Varma]: thinker will have a better chance of being a clear writer. But forcing yourself to write clearly in
[Amit Varma]: simple language that everyone can understand, not being able to hide behind vague jargon or abstract
[Guest]: generalizations, you're forced to understand your subject so much better. Absolutely. I would say my
[Guest]: aim in some way is, can people who study from me teach exactly what I do? Well, can they take at
[Guest]: least, I mean, the examples and all that might be different, but the broad takeaways, right?
[Guest]: You're always three or four takeaways at the end of each presentation. Can I be reasonably confident
[Guest]: that these guys will go and say that to their future bosses or their colleagues who mix the
[Guest]: miss the class or whatever? I try to work towards a name like that. And it's worked well for me.
[Guest]: I don't know if it's a universal, would be a universal practice. But yeah, that's something
[Guest]: I think would take that pyramid, like one step, it gives a foundation, I suppose, to that pyramid
[Guest]: basement pyramids, L1. You know, at some point, I'll take you back to your personal journey,
[Amit Varma]: because I really want to know about your childhood and all of that. But we'll save it for after the
[Amit Varma]: break. As we are sort of on teaching digital marketing, I thought, let me also ask a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about digital marketing, because I am basically a digital creator, right? But I do zero digital
[Amit Varma]: marketing. And my sort of waffling excuse for not doing it is I will often say, hey, the product is
[Amit Varma]: the best marketing, which I kind of believe it's not the full story, but I kind of believe in it,
[Amit Varma]: because I've been fortunate enough that whatever little success I've had is kind of organic,
[Amit Varma]: but we don't know the counterfactual. Now the thing about advertising is, when you're an
[Amit Varma]: advertising man, so you know, the famous quote by John Wanamaker, when he says half the money I spend
[Amit Varma]: on advertising is wasted, I don't know which half. And Ambi Parmeswaran was on my show a year back,
[Amit Varma]: and he used the phrase, spray and pray for digital marketing. Yeah. And my sense like I did little
[Amit Varma]: marketing things once in a while, like created audiograms with a minute of a snippet from my
[Amit Varma]: show and all that, and realized that it was basically just solving no purpose at all.
[Amit Varma]: And what other people who have tried digital marketing on, you know, Facebook and blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, say that it's just no point, it's a waste. So here you are successful practitioner
[Amit Varma]: teaches a course on it. What's your perspective on this? Like, what are amateurs like me missing?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how should I think differently say about digital marketing, even if I were inclined to do?
[Guest]: Yeah. So I think it all starts with a very fundamental, what do you want to do? Right?
[Guest]: Like, are you looking to reach a new audience? Are you looking to deepen engagement, if I may use
[Guest]: that phrase, with people who you're connected to? I think it all starts from there. I think a lot of
[Guest]: the mistakes that happen in marketing today are just because of unclear objectives. Like I want
[Guest]: to use Instagram is not a strategy, right? It's right. That's, that's, that's, that's, that's a
[Guest]: CMO reading about Instagram in some publication, and then making that some, some poor sods care.
[Amit Varma]: It's a box to tick.
[Guest]: If it's a box to tick, then it won't work, it might lead to a pretty looking PPT slide at the
[Guest]: end of it, but it's not going to solve a problem. So then you think about, okay, let's assume that
[Guest]: you want to reach a new audience, for example, okay, what would be a good way to reach that
[Guest]: audience? What would be a medium to reach that audience on what would be a, what would be a
[Guest]: message that will resonate with them? And I'm being extremely broad over here, because I can't
[Guest]: do ad hoc consultancy on on air. But I think it all starts with asking extremely fundamental
[Guest]: questions like that, and having logic behind everything that you do, right, and giving
[Guest]: everything enough time, like everything that you said about content creation, give it enough time
[Guest]: to breathe, etc. A lot of marketing is also that way, you are very unlikely to click a products
[Guest]: banner at the first time you see it, it's usually after say, three or four attempts at reaching you
[Guest]: that you end up clicking that and maybe the context has changed or whatever it is. So that amount of
[Guest]: repetition is needed, like Zomato didn't become a funny company of a funny brand on Instagram
[Guest]: overnight. They've been doing this for years before they have got that solid reputation. You
[Guest]: have guys who do flash in the pan sort of tweets that get popular once in a while, but unless you
[Guest]: make a habit of it, you will not be known for it and brand perception, etc will not change.
[Guest]: Right. And of course, that's a long story by a long story by itself. I think I mean,
[Guest]: it all starts with understanding what the objectives are, how, what you can do to change the
[Guest]: or let me Okay, let me let me break it down this way. I think this is a simpler way of looking at
[Guest]: it. Look at all the look at all the obstacles that are in your way towards your ideal goal and break
[Guest]: them down. I think that's honestly the simplest way to think about marketing because what is
[Guest]: marketing it's something is solving at the end of the day product needs to be sold, right? Whether
[Guest]: you're doing sales led advertising or whether you're doing brand building led advertising,
[Guest]: the end objective is to put sales on the put get money into the company's bank account, right?
[Guest]: Think about all the reasons why that's not happening right now, or why your objective
[Guest]: is not being achieved. Like in your case, suppose you suppose it's just this, this elite audience
[Guest]: that is listening to your show, which means that a huge chunk isn't what are those reasons? You
[Guest]: can't start marketing without knowing what those reasons are, because you can't just again, in
[Guest]: Nambi's words, pray and pray, throw an ad at them and hope that they will convert the ad that works
[Guest]: for say, the Lokhandwala crowd might not work for a Raipur audience might not work for a Trivandrum
[Guest]: audience, so on and so forth. Understanding why people are not clicking that ad or consuming
[Guest]: account forget clicking the ad, why they're not then it could be many other problems. They don't
[Guest]: know what a podcast is. They don't like you. They have never heard a podcast before. And the idea
[Guest]: of a four hour long podcast scares them. And then you realize it's not a marketing problem. It might
[Guest]: even be a product problem. The the USP of the product that works for one audience is actually a
[Guest]: non USP for another audience. When you start breaking things down this way, you will eventually
[Guest]: get to a point which can be solved by advertising, which is Oh, okay, this message needs to be
[Guest]: communicated to that audience and they are on MX Takatak. Great, got it. Now that's a brief.
[Guest]: But if you try to solve a problem with only advertising, I don't think it works. I think you
[Guest]: need to understand why it doesn't work. So everything you see has a role to play. Your
[Guest]: product has a role to play research has a role to play. It's simple yet complicated at the same
[Guest]: time. But I've always found the easiest way of approaching marketing. Just ask yourself,
[Guest]: what is the goal that you want to achieve? Right? For in your case, it could be get more listeners
[Guest]: in somebody else's case, it could be sell this new product. In somebody else's case, it could
[Guest]: be I've started a new course, I need to get people for it. Great, you've got your objective, which is
[Guest]: honestly half the battle, battle one. What is stopping that ideal objective from happening
[Guest]: right now? Start from there, keep asking why, why, why, why till you have enough actionable.
[Amit Varma]: So I think that's the way to go about marketing. That's fantastic. People now don't need to do
[Amit Varma]: your course anymore. Because you have just kind of given all the ground right here. No, no,
[Amit Varma]: it's it's fantastic. Like when you know, when I did my podcast course, I remember someone asked
[Amit Varma]: me that what about the marketing aspect of it? And I said, Listen, just focus on getting a good
[Amit Varma]: product first. Because, you know, if marketing a shitty product just doesn't help people,
[Amit Varma]: you just kind of sample it. And the thing with podcasting is you also want to become somebody's
[Amit Varma]: habit. And I think this is true of all creators, which is why you got to keep on doing keep on
[Amit Varma]: doing keep on doing you know, that's when you're given the privilege of somebody making you the
[Amit Varma]: habit, you know, that's kind of what you aim for. So let's now take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And in case you're feeling really bad, because you've prepared these copious notes on your
[Amit Varma]: childhood and got these old family albums with you to show me, don't feel bad. We'll talk about
[Amit Varma]: that after the break. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of
[Amit Varma]: you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009
[Amit Varma]: and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I was
[Amit Varma]: shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about
[Amit Varma]: many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well, that phase in my life
[Amit Varma]: ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through a
[Amit Varma]: newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I
[Amit Varma]: will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover
[Amit Varma]: in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and
[Amit Varma]: subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email
[Amit Varma]: inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com. Thank you. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with
[Guest]: Deepak Chak Gopalakrishnan or Chak Gopal. How do you like to be known? Yeah, that's a very good
[Guest]: question. I think let's just go with Chak for now. Because that's what most people apart from the
[Guest]: income tax department know me as. In fact, my email ID at my last two jobs actually had my nickname
[Guest]: rather than my name because everyone there was just calling me that. So chakgopal at pmo.com.
[Amit Varma]: No, let's just keep it to Chak for now. Yeah. Hello. This is Mr. Ambani's office. Can I speak
[Amit Varma]: to Chak? Yeah, that's that's a dream, isn't it? Okay. So tell me about, you know, let's go back
[Amit Varma]: in the hoary past. You know, where were you born? Where did you grow up? What was your childhood
[Guest]: like so on and so forth? Yeah, so I was born in a small country called Bahrain, which I guess many
[Guest]: people consider the Middle East, just an ex of Kerala, spent 15 years of my life over there,
[Guest]: then came back to Kerala for two years. But I think those 15 years in Bahrain, they were very
[Guest]: unnumerable, didn't have too many friends as such over there. And that wasn't necessarily because I
[Guest]: was anti social or anything, it was that the sheer heat and the distances between houses meant that
[Guest]: you needed and and zero public transport, I must add, meant that you needed your dad to ferry you
[Guest]: around everywhere in any case. So I didn't have too many close friendships growing up, which is
[Guest]: something like I missed, really. And I used to read a lot when I was a kid. But then most of
[Guest]: that reading was, you know, your Enid Blyton's, Archie's, that sort of thing. And we had a few
[Guest]: nice local magazines over there. So if any Gulf kids are over there, they'll definitely have heard
[Guest]: of young times. And that was a gateway to a completely different kind of world. In fact,
[Guest]: that magazine was responsible for my initial music knowledge, my initial technology knowledge,
[Guest]: a whole bunch of things. It was like a dream for me to get published in a young time. I think that
[Guest]: happened once or twice. So following my 10th, I came back to India, or rather, I came to India,
[Guest]: it's not I came back to India. I did my 11th and 12th in Kochi, and then, you know, went along
[Guest]: with the herd into an engineering college, because that was the thing to do. I think those four years
[Guest]: in engineering college really changed everything. I mean, I didn't become a great engineer or
[Guest]: anything like that chemical engineering for anyone who's keeping score. But I think a lot of what I
[Guest]: ended up becoming later and all that. I think those are the formative years in many, many ways,
[Guest]: which looking back now I can say, and I don't think it was very apparent at the time from
[Guest]: musical taste to what I want out of life and all those sort of things. Somewhere along the way in
[Guest]: college, typically around the third semester of engineering, you figure out what you really want
[Guest]: to do with life. And for me, that ended up being advertising. I remember there was this there was
[Guest]: this old magazine, I don't know if you remember, there was an old magazine called A&M. I believe,
[Guest]: I think it was started by the same guy who ended up starting AFAX, Shrikant Khandekar, if I'm not
[Guest]: mistaken. So I read that magazine. And I was fascinated, like, oh, wow, thought goes behind
[Guest]: all this advertising stuff and all that. And I became obsessed. I somehow I mean, I had friends
[Guest]: of mine who said that they wanted to do an MBA. And that seemed a little too distant for me. I
[Guest]: wasn't too keen on following the herd that much. Also, I like had enough of that and want to make
[Guest]: my own choices right now. And suddenly, this intersection of MBA and marketing, sorry, MBA
[Guest]: and advertising came up. And then I was obsessed with this college called MICA, really wanted to
[Guest]: get through to it, learnt everything about it, read up everything, whatever, didn't get through
[Guest]: the first attempt, realized why, fixed it and got through to got through the second, second
[Guest]: attempt, spent two years in Ahmedabad over there. And been in Mumbai ever since post that been
[Guest]: working in various advertising, marketing roles, etc. And been freelancing since 2019, early 2019
[Guest]: or so. I've always done some sort of freelancing on the side to keep the creative side going.
[Guest]: Ironic, right? You're working in an industry that's supposed to be creative, yet you're searching for
[Guest]: more creative fulfillment somewhere else. Let's just say that the love for advertising died out
[Guest]: fairly quickly. But that was that's another story by itself. So that's really where it was.
[Guest]: I genuinely think I've ended up trying more things after the age when people typically
[Guest]: stop trying things, be it with respect to work, be it even with respect to the kind of music I
[Guest]: or, you know, going outside the comfort zone with respect to music and just
[Guest]: generally trying stuff. So yeah, that's life in a nutshell, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of fascinating that earlier we were speaking about form determining content in like
[Amit Varma]: a different kind of context. Over here, when you talk about Bahrain, it seems that just the
[Unknown]: geographical form of the place where the houses are so far apart is in a sense dictating the content
[Unknown]: of who you are at that point in time. Now, you said your engineering years were formative,
[Amit Varma]: and you left it at that with that intriguing cliffhanger of a sentence we should really come
[Amit Varma]: at. Like if this was the serial, that would be the end of an episode. My engineering years
[Guest]: changed who I was. I've listened to your show enough times to know that you would
[Guest]: have made a note and gone back to it. So I didn't lose the same train of thought.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so so so yeah, so this is a moment to kind of elaborate on that. I'm really
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. So again, when I went into engineering, I didn't have too much of an idea. Let's face it
[Guest]: of what even engineering was, right? Just I just genuinely didn't know that there were other
[Guest]: options out there. And I didn't lament that too much later, because I do believe that, you know,
[Guest]: some things worked out, worked out for the best. A few things, I think I got more confident in
[Guest]: terms of what I what my strengths were, I realized that, okay, slightly more on the creative side of
[Guest]: things, etc, etc. In terms of the music I consume, like it, I went in listening to
[Guest]: a Backstreet Boys, and I got out pretty much nerding out over Dream Theater and that whole
[Guest]: thing. So I figured out, so it was, so here's the thing about Kerala Engineering College,
[Guest]: this is a very interesting set of people who come together, right, especially a government
[Guest]: college, because being a government college fees are extremely low. So you have a lot of people,
[Guest]: let's face it, wouldn't otherwise have had the chance to access high quality education,
[Guest]: lots of reservations, lots of people from across the country, even though, of course, 95% would be
[Guest]: largely Malayalees. So among this so called local crowd, and I, please don't mistake me,
[Guest]: I do not say that with any like malice or anything like that some of my best friends who I
[Guest]: made during engineering were people who I, you know, I had difficulty speaking to because I
[Guest]: don't speak Malayalam very well, and they don't speak English very well. So you have these set
[Guest]: of guys. At the same time, you had a fair bunch of people from the Gulf. So people who I had
[Guest]: enough cultural context with could talk about the cartoons and things that happened and again,
[Guest]: young times and all that. And then you had that demographic from India as well. So you have the
[Guest]: convent educated guys as well, who used to hang out with us all that purely because the you know,
[Guest]: the type of music and all that we consumed were similar and they were interesting overlap. So I
[Guest]: thought this was so all in all, you had guys who you knew were destined to say get into an IIM
[Guest]: someday. And then you had you had a mix of things. And I think that was very, very enriching,
[Guest]: because you were forced to interact with a lot of people get I spent most of my life extremely
[Guest]: sheltered in Bahrain forcibly so and in 11th and 12th, because again, in 11th and 12th,
[Guest]: you're just focusing on your boards. And, you know, getting into a good college or whatever.
[Guest]: I think college was the first time I actually did things, you know, expanded outside book,
[Guest]: I mean, outside school books and into more other kinds of books, develop extracurriculars for the
[Guest]: first time, learned a little bit of music. Ironically, I actually, like every good South
[Guest]: Indian boy growing up in the Gulf, I learned Carnatic, but I never was really too passionate
[Guest]: about that. It was when I picked up the guitar and started learning music that I actually liked
[Guest]: that I started paying more of an attention to things including, ironically enough, back Carnatic
[Guest]: and like, Oh, yeah, that is what is happening over there, except I never paid attention to it. It's
[Guest]: amazing how perspective changes. It's, it's kind of weird. So this is this is weird little story
[Guest]: that that I have, which I think, I want to say kind of changed everything. It's, it's kind of
[Guest]: weird. And maybe I'm hyping it up more than it actually is. So there was this, I, in my first
[Guest]: year of college, I was staying in a, in a hostel, just predominantly from predominantly the local
[Guest]: guys, right. And I was an extremely shy, I was an outsider for all practical purposes, because my
[Guest]: Malayalam was very bad. I don't get cultural references. And because I grew up in the Gulf,
[Guest]: I don't even get the Hindi references. So like, Sholay, all these things just went over my head,
[Guest]: like these guys are talking about shows in the DD ads of the 90s, completely over my head. So
[Guest]: I was in my room silently reading Michael Crichton or something like that. And just whiling the time
[Guest]: away recently started discovering some sort of music, etc. And I was pretty much an unknown
[Guest]: entity in the hostel and college at around that time, I was kind of happy with that.
[Guest]: But I always had a sense of humor, or what I'd like to think was a sense of humor.
[Guest]: Growing up, like I said, I was, I used to read a lot of Archie, but the one mag,
[Guest]: but the one publication that actually, I would say impacted the content I ended up creating was Mad
[Guest]: Magazine. There was something about that slightly surreal sort of humor that really, really appealed
[Guest]: to me. And when I was in 11th and 12th, I tried making Mad Magazine style comics when I was in
[Guest]: in school, but they would be based on people around, you know, that was my first attempt at
[Guest]: content creation, if you want to know that you're using that term, which would it would be like a
[Guest]: series of how me and a bunch of friends stole the samosas from the canteen, and then the superheroes
[Guest]: who are the professors would come and save the day. Also the things with all sorts of in jokes
[Guest]: here and there. I don't know how much of an Archie fan you are. But one of my favorite artists was a
[Guest]: guy called Sam Squats. And what I used to love about him apart from his style, his art itself,
[Guest]: is that while the main story is happening in the foreground in the background, some random thing
[Guest]: would be happening. He was delightful at doing that. Very similar to Mad's, those little things
[Guest]: that they draw on the sides. I was highly inspired by all this randomness that somehow seemed to make
[Guest]: sense together. Right. And this was a time long before I discovered Monty Python or Sergeant
[Guest]: Peppers or even Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. So my idea of randomness came from a completely
[Guest]: different angle. And somehow I worked all of this in and I realized I enjoy doing stuff like this.
[Guest]: So but again, this was to English speaking convent educated audience, etc. When I came to
[Guest]: college, all of that, obviously, there was no audience for something like that. So something
[Guest]: very interesting happened. So it was the term exams for our first and second terms combines the
[Guest]: first stressful time for the entire hostel. So they decided to do a and I'm not making this up
[Guest]: a PJ competition. Okay, in Malayalam PJ is called chali. So it was a chali competition. And the way
[Guest]: it worked was it was extremely sophisticated for if anyone who thinks that this is a frivolous
[Guest]: activity is very well thought through. There were two jury members who anyone who wanted to submit
[Guest]: a joke or a chali rather to the competition had to go and say to these guys and they would update
[Guest]: it in their ledger. And every day the score would be updated at the front of their door. They were
[Guest]: roommates. So there was some like, like seedings already basis reputation. So some guys had like
[Guest]: 10 points already because of the reputation. I obviously had zero because nobody knew who I was.
[Guest]: Then I like, but I was good at coming up with funds, especially engineering college funds,
[Guest]: because you have so many terms to work around with. So I would make random things like
[Guest]: what do you call the temperature of 15th of August, 1948, 1947, the answer would be degree
[Guest]: of freedom. So I would make things like this. And I just got the balls one day to go to these guys
[Guest]: and submit my humble entry. And at first they were like you of all people are coming to him,
[Guest]: okay, let's hear your submission. And they were surprised that I could do this. And then that
[Guest]: encouraged me to do more, more, more. And I think I was the topmost person who didn't have a seeding
[Guest]: in that competition. So over a period of two months, my reputation, if I may use that phrase,
[Guest]: transformed a little bit. I know it seems like a very, very weird story on it. And like, I'm
[Guest]: probably making out a silly hostile thing to be more than what it actually is. But the amount of
[Guest]: confidence that that little thing gave me that I could do this in front of an audience that
[Guest]: wasn't my so called, you know, quote, unquote, target audience, as we might say, that these are
[Guest]: like people who I wouldn't have never spoken to otherwise, who suddenly now know me because of
[Guest]: this, there are people who from other departments coming up and saying, Oh, do you have a joke on
[Guest]: our department? So that felt strange, weird, scary all at once. And I didn't quite know what to make
[Guest]: of it. But what one thing I didn't let go was my love for jokes, or chalice as they are enough for
[Guest]: a very good friend of mine at the time to say, we are not calling you Deepak anymore, we are calling
[Guest]: you Charlie plus Deepak. And that's really how the name comes. What an origin story. Yeah, that's
[Guest]: really how the name came about. And it's stuck since then, a random idea it was in 2004, I guess,
[Guest]: and it's stuck ever since. You know, I think everyone has those little moments that changed
[Guest]: life in some way or the other. And I think that was it for me, the fact that I decided to go up
[Guest]: to these guys and actually say that silly little thing. Because I think that gave me the confidence
[Guest]: then to I was learning the guitar a little bit at that time say, Okay, what if I take this to stage
[Guest]: like, I mean, not that I blew the crowds away, we were very bad, but going up and getting booed on
[Guest]: stages and other experience altogether, because once that happens, you can take anything else
[Guest]: that comes your way. And we embrace that we actually took on the mantle of being that one act
[Guest]: that tries very hard is always going to get booed. And we absolutely had a whale of a time.
[Guest]: You know, that's, that's what I said, when I said discovering myself in college, I think that was,
[Guest]: you know, incidents like this were instrumental in, in, in doing that, figuring out what kind
[Guest]: of music I liked what my role in my friends group in some sense was, as the years progressed in
[Guest]: college, my hobbies became more and more, you know, I started doing more and more things like,
[Guest]: there was a certain, like a friend, like there were three of us who were obsessed with doing
[Guest]: the Hindu crossword on a daily basis. And that was a time when every mobile operator was offering
[Guest]: free SMS. And, you know, while WhatsApp has made things super convenient growing up in an age where
[Guest]: age of SMS has a different vibe altogether, as the kids might say these days. So we used to sit
[Guest]: at the back and we used to and all of us had mastered the art of typing on a T9 mobile phone,
[Guest]: Nokia 1100, without looking at the screens, right? And we would solve the crossword. And
[Guest]: the challenge was, we get the crossword, each of us had the Hindu subscription, we would get it and
[Guest]: we would all try to solve it. The challenge was to see whether we could nail it by the end of the
[Guest]: day. Most more often than not, we didn't. But on the 10 odd occasions that we did, it was,
[Guest]: it was a cause for celebration. So you know, we would do things like that. And then somewhere
[Guest]: along the way, since I realized, okay, my future is not in engineering is going to be more in
[Guest]: advertising and MBA in any case. So the attention that we paid, I mean, and it kind of felt bad,
[Guest]: in some sense, because I knew I was taking up a seat, which I was never going to actually utilize.
[Guest]: But I was also extremely practical. I was very meticulous about maintaining 75% attendance to
[Guest]: the point where we had a so called cutter meter, where they would, you know, actually track how
[Guest]: much percentage of attendance we had. And everything else is utilized towards anything
[Guest]: that could get me towards the institute that I wanted to because to me, that was, you know,
[Guest]: the larger thing, in any case, so it's not like I was going off and playing hooky on the side.
[Guest]: So yeah, that was, that was about it. I think a combination of all these things together,
[Guest]: the kind of things that I read, also change the kind of music I listened to change the
[Guest]: the discovering what my strengths, weaknesses, all that were also sort of changed.
[Guest]: I discovered a few skills that I had that I knew I had, which I never thought I would
[Guest]: actually put out, you know, a combination of all these things. I think, if you look at it from a
[Guest]: delta point of view, now I'm being an engineer over here in terms of the change that happened,
[Guest]: I don't think any other experience has changed me as much like Micah was great. But, you know,
[Guest]: the change that happened when I went in in 2007. And when I got on 2009, wasn't as much as the
[Guest]: delta that happened when I went into engineering and out. And I think the I think the thing I had
[Guest]: no plan when I went in, again, goes back to our first conversation, they just get into it,
[Guest]: learn lessons along the way, many, many of them will be post facto. Like, for example,
[Guest]: only now 10 years later, am I realizing the worth of a Micah education when I got out,
[Guest]: it wasn't instantly apparent to me. So yeah, that was all these things put together, I think was why
[Guest]: I said that college was really, I think those four years made in me in many ways, I don't think
[Guest]: I have changed all that much from, like 2006. When I graduated to where I am right now,
[Guest]: in terms of thinking in terms of, yeah, I mean, what I used to call logic then has become first
[Guest]: principles now. So it's become more sophisticated, maybe I have, but the here's the thing, I still
[Guest]: listen to music the same way how I did back then, the kind of music might have changed, but
[Guest]: my approach to certain things have haven't changed. So yeah, I think all that is,
[Guest]: I'm again, probably romanticizing those four years more than I should have. But yeah,
[Amit Varma]: that's what I think. Yeah, I mean, I mean, some things you realize only in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing about you know, that that joke competition being important, because it gave
[Amit Varma]: you the confidence is it makes so much sense, because what is important to one person,
[Amit Varma]: it might seem trivial outside. The other angle I want to explore is that when I look back on
[Amit Varma]: my childhood, and when I look back on my own growing up years and going through college and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, you realize that there are sort of two simultaneous processes working on you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And one is you're figuring out who you are in terms of what you like, what kind of person
[Amit Varma]: you are, what your tastes are, and all of that. But the other comes from the anxiety of fitting in,
[Amit Varma]: because obviously, you want your peers to like you, you want to be seen as cool,
[Amit Varma]: you don't want to do uncool things, all of that. And there's a tug of war there. And with many
[Amit Varma]: people, I think this can be a lifelong process like in on both these margins, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I think there are many people who perhaps don't introspect enough or are self reflective enough,
[Amit Varma]: and their personhood who they really are is kind of determined in many ways by accident and
[Amit Varma]: serendipity and they let things happen to them. And they don't perhaps sit back and think and of
[Amit Varma]: course, one extreme argument could be made that there is no personhood you're acting even to
[Amit Varma]: yourself. But apart from that, and the other aspect is that anxiety of what other people
[Amit Varma]: think of you, I think is a lifelong anxiety that you have to learn to lose. And I actually started
[Amit Varma]: thinking about it in a mindful way, really, I think probably only in my 40s, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you realize that first of all, that anxiety is pointless, because nobody's thinking of you,
[Amit Varma]: everybody's got their head up. Nobody gives a shit. So you just, you just do what you do.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that you've thought about? Because I imagine both these processes
[Amit Varma]: would have happened during those engineering years, because just in terms of age, how old you
[Amit Varma]: are, that is a formative period in everybody's life that one, you're figuring out who you are
[Amit Varma]: in terms of maybe your humor, maybe the kind of music you're discovering the kind of books you're
[Amit Varma]: enjoying reading. And at the same time, you're trying to fit in, you're trying to get that
[Amit Varma]: validation from the people around you, in a sense, you're asking yourself, even then,
[Amit Varma]: what is my role in the story? And maybe trying to form that role for yourself. Yeah. And it
[Amit Varma]: seems that humor in some ways, is also a way of fitting in of, you know, yeah, you're gaining
[Guest]: that case. So yeah, is this something you've thought about? Yeah, oh, absolutely. In fact,
[Guest]: more than engineering, I think this hit me a lot when I was in 11th and 12th. And for many reasons.
[Guest]: Because one, I was coming into a school that I was coming in at 11th and 12th. I was one of like
[Guest]: three people who didn't study in that institute before. So which meant I was going into one of
[Guest]: the top schools in the city. With very smart people, I grew up in Barin and Barin for like
[Guest]: has many things going for it. But there are only so many people and your frame of reference in
[Guest]: terms of your peer group and all that is only there just to give you context. I scored 92.x in
[Guest]: my 10th. And that made me third in the country. Right? Again, we're talking about a country which
[Guest]: is roughly the size of the suburb that we are recording this in right now. That's one of the
[Amit Varma]: finest humblebrags in my podcast. I became third in the country. Yeah, but I'm saying that for
[Guest]: context. And now that 92.6 became some eighth in the class that I was in. Right. So just to give
[Guest]: you a context of the peer group that I had, along with this, all these guys were really good at
[Guest]: playing cricket, they somebody played guitar really well, which I never thought was a thing.
[Guest]: There was somebody else who was a great dancer, all of these guys were studying by day and
[Guest]: organizing events. And I was in awe of my peer group, because I've never been exposed to something
[Guest]: like this before. And those two years, the amount of imposter syndrome that I had the amount of
[Guest]: the amount of trying to fit in, plus, I didn't speak the language all that well, all those things.
[Guest]: And I think in some way, I told you about the first content creation exercise, which was the
[Guest]: comics and all that. That was born out of a desperation to, I wouldn't say fit in, but to
[Guest]: almost say I am eligible to be part of this group of people. Sure, I may not be able to play cricket
[Guest]: terrible at it. I may not be able to play sport or learn something. I mean, let's face it by 11th.
[Guest]: If you don't play some of these things in your formative years, you're never going to get there
[Guest]: in any case. So drawing was one thing I was decent at, I thought, okay, let's try to convert some of
[Guest]: that. And I was very happy when people were actually asking me, when are you going to do
[Guest]: the next one, for example. So I would say that whatever you spoke about this wantingness to fit
[Guest]: in and all that was more true for me in my 11th and 12th, because of the new change in circumstances
[Guest]: and all that. Strangely enough, college was a little easier, because I stopped worrying about that
[Guest]: at one level. A second level, I had a very tight group of friends when I was in college. So
[Guest]: I didn't and it was a very small group, right? So I didn't need to impress the whole colleges
[Guest]: needed to impress three people, all of whom had the same sort of interest, etc. And we were very,
[Guest]: very tight. A lot of this pressure that you're talking about, it's very interesting, you ask
[Guest]: this question, it just seems like a very natural question. And when you were saying that flashes
[Guest]: of how insecure I was in 11th and 12th came, but engineering not at all, I didn't feel the need to
[Guest]: do that at all. Also, because I knew that I will always be an outsider over here, because here you
[Guest]: have a college that is entirely 95% Malayalam, their frame of reference, completely different,
[Guest]: I will always be a niche out here, right? I will niche in the sense I don't say that in a positive
[Guest]: way, I will always be an outsider over here. I'm okay with that. I know what I want from this
[Guest]: place, I will get it, make a few friends and screw off from here. Right. And I thought I think I got
[Guest]: that. So I think in some sense, that pressure was off. To some extent, it came back when I went to
[Guest]: Micah and I had that, you know, again, need to impress everyone all over again. But I think by
[Guest]: then things had changed, gotten older, had some skills, etc. did enough online notoriety for
[Guest]: myself to have some sort of a reputation going in. And all that. So yeah, I'm not quite sure if I
[Guest]: answered your question, but I didn't face that anxiety when I was in when I was in college in
[Amit Varma]: any case. And have they changed in interesting ways? For example, one thing that you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I look back on the past, I look back on myself, and I think, hey, I'm a completely different
[Amit Varma]: person. Yeah, completely. But I look back on others, and many of them seem to be the same guy
[Amit Varma]: that put on weight and all of that. But it's almost like there is an essentialness that is there. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And they are that thing all their lives, whatever it is. Oh, yeah. So what's your sense of this of
[Guest]: that essentialness and the complete change? I think this is true from say, the two, three people
[Guest]: from school, I'm in touch with the five, six people in from college, I'm in touch with and
[Guest]: maybe the many people from post that I'm in touch with very few people have surprised me of, you
[Guest]: know, going off another path altogether. This could also be a myth because of the nature of the
[Guest]: places where I studied. I studied in a Kerala college I studied in. Yes, I studied in Gujarat,
[Guest]: but Micah is extremely not like the rest of Gujarat. If you know what I mean. And in that
[Guest]: sense, those people always had some principles or some grounding, etc, which was never likely to
[Guest]: change. Yeah, you're right. They put on weight, they've taken career paths that I never thought
[Guest]: they would like serve some people from my batch at Micah who became entrepreneurs, who I never
[Guest]: thought that would happen. That aspect is a professional aspect changed. But yeah, as a
[Guest]: person, I don't think that many people have surprised me in that. I'm not quite sure why
[Guest]: that is. But I guess some people, some part of it, yeah, just remains the same, as you say.
[Amit Varma]: And you also mentioned that, you know, there were all these people who were good at so many things.
[Unknown]: Yeah. And some of the stuff you realize that if you don't have it by the 11th standard,
[Guest]: you're not going to get good at it. What did you mean?
[Guest]: Sport mostly, mostly sport, because yeah, sure, drawing or music or something you can pick up
[Guest]: later. But if you haven't been through the rough and tumble of playing cricket when you were, say,
[Guest]: eight years old, right? 15 and 16 is a very, very difficult time to pick up a team sport.
[Guest]: Let me make that clear. Like I cycle and I think I'm decent at it. But that's something I picked
[Guest]: up in my late 20s. But something like a team sport, not just because of skill itself, I think
[Guest]: it also involves a lot of interpersonal communications and all those little nuances
[Guest]: which you miss. I still remember whenever basketball game was on, I felt very out of
[Guest]: place playing as part of a team. So I, me and a couple of others would always just play by ourselves
[Guest]: or we'll play solo. I don't know whether that's sad or whether that's whether that's resourceful.
[Guest]: But yeah, that's, that's basically what I meant. I realized that, okay, yeah, I am too old to start
[Amit Varma]: playing these kinds of games. So yeah, yeah. And I think that's true of non team sports also,
[Amit Varma]: like chess, for example, if you're not at a certain level by 11 or 12, you're simply not
[Amit Varma]: going to make it, which, you know, one of the when I talk to my writing students, again,
[Amit Varma]: the word students, when I talk to participants of my writing course, one of the things that I
[Amit Varma]: take pains to emphasize, and again, is something I feel really strongly about. So I take pains to
[Amit Varma]: emphasize is that in certain things, I mean, hard work is required for everything. But in certain
[Amit Varma]: things, you also need some raw talent. Like if you're a batsman, you need your hand-eye coordination.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a fast bowler, you'll need your fast twitch muscles, certain things you have to be
[Amit Varma]: born with. But for writing, as I keep saying, you don't need to be born with anything, anyone can
[Amit Varma]: learn to write great prose, right? It's just a question of putting in the work, you can start
[Amit Varma]: at any point in time, and you can pick it up. And it's important to say this, because there are
[Amit Varma]: too many people who are perhaps at an early stage in their learning. Yeah. And they have the imposter
[Amit Varma]: syndrome, and they don't have the confidence and they just beat themselves up. Yeah. And you cannot
[Guest]: do that. It's just a question of putting in the 10,000 hours. And by corollary, there are some
[Guest]: people who probably got an undeserved 80 out of 100 for their English exam in the ninth who think
[Guest]: they're great writers, but no, they're just good at cracking an exam system. So yeah, I think it
[Amit Varma]: works both ways. Works both ways. So I want to ask you this about music, where does music fall in
[Amit Varma]: that? Like you try to be a musician, you learn the guitar and all of that, you know, from your
[Amit Varma]: college years, and which is okay, not that early, you're not a child prodigy, but it's pretty much
[Amit Varma]: when most people learn, I think, yeah. So how was that journey for you? And, you know, and where
[Amit Varma]: would you say music falls on that spectrum? For example, I know, you're a big fan of say,
[Amit Varma]: Warren Mendoza, great guitarist. So what's the difference between a you and a him? Is there also
[Amit Varma]: a certain difference in a lot of talent? Or is it just that he's put in many more hours from an
[Amit Varma]: earlier stage? So to a budding musician, what would you say? Where does it fall on the spectrum?
[Guest]: I don't think you should use the word musician with me at any point of time. Yes, there was a
[Guest]: time I tried to learn how to play the guitar made a fool of myself on stage enough number of times,
[Guest]: but I don't think that is enough to qualify as a musician. So I like there were multiple
[Guest]: questions you also try to answer them together. So one is, you could say I had a grounding in
[Guest]: music because I was put through the Carnatic thing enjoyed it for what it was, but wasn't
[Guest]: like I would definitely not want to go through that again, because I didn't see myself doing
[Guest]: that beyond the point I honestly went more for the company of friends rather than for the art itself.
[Guest]: In college, it was just something I wanted to try. I didn't start off with Oh, I'm going to
[Guest]: become a great musician one day. Right? For me, it was just something I wanted to try. It looks
[Guest]: like it looked like an interesting timepass sort of activity, I've used the word timepass
[Guest]: activity. And it was also the time I started listening to slightly more challenging music than
[Guest]: the, you know, Backstreet Boys, Bon Jovi's of the world with all due respect to said artists. Now,
[Guest]: what happens is when you play an instrument, you start gaining immense amount of respect for the
[Guest]: recorded music as well. So I thought both of those fed off nicely of each other, and learned enough
[Guest]: to be able to perform a few songs on stage. And that I think really is where my, my journey as a
[Guest]: quote unquote, musician should, should come into play. It taught me a lot, though, it taught me,
[Guest]: being in a band is a different experience altogether, you experience a lot of highs and
[Guest]: lows together, it's a logistically very difficult game, because you have to lug instruments all over
[Guest]: the place, you have to practice a lot before you can even make a very basic four chord song,
[Guest]: sound decent. There are lots of fights that happen, you want to perform one song,
[Guest]: another person wants to perform another and other person wants to perform an original. So
[Guest]: yeah, the number of fights we've had in bands, and we're just talking about two college bands
[Guest]: over here, let alone, you know, I wonder what happened. Now we go back goes back to Beatles,
[Guest]: right? Imagine what those conversations were like. And now I understand what creative differences
[Guest]: mean, you know, when they when bands break up. That was really it with respect to performing,
[Guest]: you know, just to use, you accused me of being a musician. So I'll leave it at that. In terms of
[Guest]: how I might be different from a Warren purely from that perspective, one, of course, he's put
[Guest]: in the hours and all that. But I think, you know, I think he also, so that obviously changes you
[Guest]: right there. We may both have an interesting idea for a melody in our heads, but purely he but he's
[Guest]: able to translate that into final output better, because he's got the skills for it, which you can
[Guest]: argue have been built over, over, over a period of time. But then what happens because you know,
[Guest]: the basics is that you're able to form those melodies in the first place better, you know,
[Guest]: what's going to work better, you know, what audiences are going to react to better. So it's
[Guest]: not just a matter of you sitting on the pot and coming out of the tune and saying, Hey, this might
[Guest]: be a hit song, right? In order to get to that stage, you need to have done a whole lot of other
[Guest]: things, studied music, put two and two together. And I think that I think is more important, right?
[Guest]: I think, and I don't think that is something that you can be born with by itself. I think stuff
[Guest]: like that comes from having learned music, study music, having tried a lot of things. No, okay,
[Guest]: this is, oh, this sounds good, but it's actually derived from something else. It sounds exciting
[Guest]: now, but in final version output, it won't be great or, you know, whatever the whatever the
[Guest]: case may be. And finally, just the doggedness to pursue and get it out. You know, I think that's
[Guest]: the that's a very, very big thing. Even if you have a very simple melody in your head,
[Guest]: as any content creator will know, an idea sounds great until you need to start execution,
[Guest]: right? And then the difficult job begins of putting it together, getting a band together,
[Guest]: recording it and all that. So it's a scandalous question to ask Amit, but I think those are the,
[Guest]: I think the few ways in which I humble Deepak Gopalakrishnan, I'm different from
[Guest]: the finest guitarist in the country. No, no, I think I think the moment I kind of
[Amit Varma]: phrased the question, and I was thinking aloud, I realized it's sort of absurdly phrased.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think obviously, if two different people put in an equal number of hours and hard work,
[Amit Varma]: they can reach something like an equal number, an equal amount of proficiency.
[Amit Varma]: Correct. But in actually having, you know, that extra spark that takes it to play, like,
[Unknown]: you know, there might be people who can play the guitar technically as well as Warren, for example,
[Unknown]: can they write on Uva Sky? Yeah, right. So that's kind of what takes it to the other level. And this
[Amit Varma]: also reminds me about a conversation I had perhaps circa 2001, or maybe even in the late 90s,
[Amit Varma]: about a friend with a band called Orange Street. And what I mentioned about them was that I thought
[Amit Varma]: they had interesting ideas for songs and some of the originals were really good. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there was something missing. And my friend said, you know, what the problem is, they're not good
[Amit Varma]: enough to play their own songs. And, yeah, and if anyone from Orange Street is listening to this,
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry, if it sounds harsh, I'm, I'm reporting what somebody else said to me. But it's just
[Amit Varma]: something that came to mind when you spoke about how you can come up with a melody, but then to
[Amit Varma]: actually execute it and take it out there, maybe you need your 10,000 hours, you know, maybe,
[Amit Varma]: maybe an Orange Street today, if they had persevered would have been like a whole different
[Amit Varma]: level. So let's kind of go back now you've you've done Micah. Yeah. And I'm interested that here
[Amit Varma]: also there are other creative urges playing out like you're doing your cartooning and your humor
[Amit Varma]: and your little bits of thing out there. You're going on the internet and in those times, what
[Amit Varma]: was that like? You know, how important was that for you? Did you ever at some point say that this
[Amit Varma]: is what I want to do? Because typically, the creators don't really want to be marketing and
[Guest]: advertising people, right? Yeah, yeah. No. Oh, yeah. I mean, when I was actually let me go back
[Guest]: a little bit. I think that's an important part of the story that I haven't mentioned, which is
[Guest]: this website called Pagal Gai. Not sure if you're familiar with it. Also, for those who don't know,
[Guest]: Pagal Gai used to be a thriving forum of MBA aspirants from around the country built on
[Guest]: very old forum technology that you will find only certain hobbies communities using right now.
[Guest]: Obviously, all those conversations have migrated to WhatsApp group, Facebook groups, and
[Guest]: all that right now. But back in the day, Pagal Gai was the community of all MBA aspirants across
[Guest]: the country. And I think that by itself and I hate to sound elitist when I'm saying this is
[Guest]: a great filter by itself, because now you have some very smart people scattered across the country,
[Guest]: different backgrounds. I think that entire experience of hanging out with those guys.
[Guest]: So again, just to give context as to where I was, I was studying in a small town in Kerala,
[Guest]: I had my friends who I was hanging out with, sure, but and a couple of them were also keen
[Guest]: on doing MBA and all that. But nobody else had heard of Micah yet alone wanted that to be the
[Guest]: only B school that they were aspiring for. And I suddenly and I went from that, you know,
[Guest]: dearth of information to this place where not only were there people like me, but also, you know,
[Guest]: with similar interests across the country and all that I was addicted to Pagal Gai like and this was
[Guest]: just the time when internet cafes and all that started becoming a little popular in small towns
[Guest]: as well. So I would still remember and my college was on the outskirts of the town as most of these
[Guest]: big colleges tend to be. So I would take a bus right after college, I would go to what do you
[Guest]: have? What was the thing Reliance World somewhere, Webworld, Reliance Webworld. I was such a fan of
[Guest]: Reliance Webworld. I actually once wore their t-shirt like a salesman on stage while playing
[Unknown]: bass. But that's, but yeah, that's no wonder your musical career didn't take off. That's how cool I
[Guest]: was back in the day. So I used to go to Reliance Webworld and I would spend hours and hours on
[Guest]: Pagal Gai just absorbing everything I could about not just Micah, but, oh, wow, these are the
[Guest]: cultural references of these people like, you know, and I spent a lot of time over there made a
[Guest]: lot of and that was the first virtual community that was a part of, you know, Orkut was all just
[Guest]: taking off at that point of time. And from there, parts of that community segued into Twitter,
[Guest]: right? It's kind of interesting. So I'm not a big fan of my Twitter handle myself,
[Guest]: Chuck underscore Gopal. I much I prefer Chuck of all trades, which is cheesy in another different
[Guest]: way, but leave it at that. The only reason is because of character limit. Chuck of all trades
[Guest]: 16. And so I just carried forward the email, the handle I had randomly made when I when I
[Guest]: was on Pagal Gai. So a lot of people from there suddenly identified me. Oh, you're the same guy
[Guest]: over here. Okay, cool. Whatever. Now, the question that you asked was very interesting. The internet
[Guest]: and in particular, some certain creators played such a role for me going I told you how Mad
[Guest]: Magazine influenced me a lot when I was in school, and that took me on one type of humor. There was
[Guest]: another strand of humor that I discovered when I was at Micah, which took me on a completely
[Guest]: different path. And that gentleman was Anand Ramachandran, aka Big Fat Phoenix. For those
[Guest]: of you who are unaware, he used to write one of India's funniest, I want to say it's a blog,
[Guest]: but it's more like a, it's more like a stream of consciousness, personal diary of sorts,
[Guest]: come satire news sort of thing, called son of bossy. I think strands of that are some remnants
[Guest]: of that are still littered around the internet, which Anand with his munificence once in a while,
[Amit Varma]: revives. In fact, I don't know, Chuck, the first time you and I met was we were at the mall and
[Guest]: you were with Anand. And Anand, dear friend of mine lived in Mumbai also. Yeah. And that's when
[Guest]: he kind of introduced us. Not too far from where we are recording right now. In fact,
[Guest]: so many times hung out at the place. But anyway, so I discovered I don't know how to be very honest,
[Guest]: because I was not into that South Indian humor scene at all. It just randomly came up. And
[Guest]: from there, to be very honest, like exactly what you said, I know you through those guys,
[Guest]: a lot of Twitter guys, Naren from that entire like that opened up a completely different,
[Guest]: you know, world to me, getting onto Twitter and discovering all this at the same time. So it's
[Guest]: just a lot of, you know, happy accidents coming together, really. And that influenced me a lot.
[Guest]: I think I think I was so influenced by and inspired by that era of great humor writers,
[Guest]: very specifically, Anand, Naren, Krish Ashok, for example, a lot of people's tweets, Ramesh Srivats
[Guest]: tweets, for instance. So I that was the, you know, that was the the a gang to me at that point of
[Guest]: time. And I still think a lot of those guys are far funnier than many of the standup comedians
[Guest]: who we see right now, with all due respect to even those set of with those set of talents.
[Guest]: And, yeah, I think that influenced me a lot, you know, that entire, that entire thing. And I think
[Guest]: and you, you, I think you will agree with me on this, that Twitter from 2009, to say, around 2012,
[Guest]: 2013 was sort of like a golden period, like so many friends, friendships really made from there
[Guest]: so many weddings of people who I met on Twitter at that time, still close friends right now,
[Guest]: so many professional engagements have come up because of that. So yeah, I think all that,
[Guest]: I think it was a perfect storm. And I think it was a product of its time both Pagal Gai right now,
[Guest]: for example, something like that wouldn't happen. And also that, that is just one of those golden
[Guest]: periods that tended to that happen. And I'm just very, very grateful to have been a part of both
[Amit Varma]: of these at a time when that happened. Yeah, I mean, I was never too active on Twitter. But I do
[Amit Varma]: remember it as being such a nice, friendly, warm place to hang out. And it's just become
[Guest]: like the most toxic place. Yeah, yeah, it's Yeah, I mean, that's, that's a that's a slippery slope,
[Guest]: which we should like just avoid. But the other thing about that early Twitter era is how,
[Guest]: how the humor was sometimes just so random, spontaneous. And like, I remember there was
[Guest]: this one, you know, we would do random hashtags, and people would get it, you know, I put out for
[Guest]: example, something like I tried to make a hashtag that was combined making puns on Iron Maiden songs
[Guest]: with context of Mumbai. So Iron Maiden has a song called Power Slave. So I just said Powai
[Guest]: Slave hashtag Iron Maiden Mumbai, that's it. I just left it at that with zero context,
[Guest]: zero context. Five minutes later, people understood and they were riffing off it,
[Guest]: which is the finest definition of what a meme is. And we will do random things like this. Again,
[Guest]: Anand or Ramesh, one of these troublemakers, they had a hashtag called Twitter sounds. And what
[Guest]: Twitter sounds was a person's handle said twice together, what does that resemble? So for example,
[Guest]: and Anand would come out with all sorts of things. Ramesh Rivas Ramesh Rivas was the shuffling sound
[Guest]: that students make in the backbench when they see the principal walking down the hall. You know,
[Guest]: to me that one tweet personified early Twitter that you know that era. So I think yeah, I think
[Guest]: a lot of I was influenced by that a lot because I wanted to get to that level, you know, in terms of
[Guest]: humor in terms of acceptability in some sense in terms of, again, imposter syndrome, all those sort
[Guest]: of things. Right? Yeah, I think and did you did you also try stand up and stuff? I did actually.
[Guest]: So it is very strange. Actually, my story of stand up is extremely different from the wave that's
[Guest]: happening right now, or arguably peaked a couple of years back. One of the early experiments I
[Guest]: tried in when I was, you know, just starting off freelancing and all that was I used to draw comics
[Guest]: for Pagal Gai. In fact, they were all based on MBA life and all that it was the idea that my editor
[Guest]: at the time added a person who I've unfortunately fall like, we've had our differences. So we don't
[Guest]: get out of touch, but a person who I have deep respect for with respect to his professional
[Guest]: capabilities. And if he's listening, I want him to know that he encouraged me to try this sort of
[Guest]: okay, let's try making you actually the story goes before that. Have you do you remember this old
[Unknown]: website called fly you fools? By any chance? Yeah, of course, who weirdly thinking about you,
[Guest]: you resemble Sadhak. He used to so fly you fools was a short lived cult webcomic, where he had
[Guest]: these photographs of his you'll remember this, he had those photos, some 1015 photographs he'd taken
[Guest]: and he would use the same photographs in every comic. And he would just change the text on the
[Guest]: bubbles. This was a standard shtick. It was beautiful. He put out a competition one day,
[Guest]: again, it goes back to competitions. Again, I think my life is life changes when competitions
[Guest]: like this happen. He put out a fill in the whatever your regular fill in the bubble sort
[Guest]: of competition, I won the audience, the same favor. So Saad selected somebody else. But,
[Guest]: but some 15 people in the comments, I don't know, Deepak deserves like he is was the funniest,
[Guest]: like, Oh, that's that, that actually, that makes me feel happier. So my editor, or who would want
[Guest]: to be my editor, he saw this and said, Hey, you want to try doing something like this for Pagal
[Guest]: Gai. The initial idea was exactly the same. He actually photographed some people in office,
[Guest]: he sent them to me and see do what you can with these. So I did something it worked out well,
[Guest]: at least the first two got received well. And then I said, Do you mind if I try drawing these and my
[Guest]: drawing skills? Why had deteriorated greatly from the time I got to C plus for drawing a
[Guest]: apple in a in higher kindergarten. But that being said, I did win a few drawing prizes and stuff
[Guest]: along the way. So I tried doing it. And it worked out well, I think what worked more than the art,
[Guest]: honestly, was the fact that somebody was making MBA related jokes, it is extremely niche in terms
[Guest]: of his audience. But that was the community that Pagal Gai was at that point of time, you could
[Guest]: make this is a little bit like Miss Excel. It is it very much is and I actually wanted to make that
[Guest]: point. And so like, I'll tell you a kind of jokes that jokes again, quote, unquote, that would work
[Guest]: and you will see why they would bomb better, say comedy store or something like that. There are
[Guest]: some very subtle differences between I am Ahmedabad and I am Bangalore, which only people in the MBA
[Guest]: circuit know, because it doesn't matter to anybody else. I am Bangalore, for instance, at least it
[Guest]: this was a scene 10 years back, can't say whether it's the same thing right now. I am Bangalore used
[Guest]: to be this place where, which was a wildcard with respect to whether you would get a call or not,
[Guest]: you had people who would get a call from all other IIMs. And for some reason, Bangalore would not be
[Guest]: there. And you would have people who will get a call only from Bangalore, even though they have
[Guest]: only 92 percentile, they put it down to whatever, like some lemon in spoon race, you must have one
[Guest]: in fifth standard, therefore, you've gotten this. So also theory. So, you know, bringing out humor
[Guest]: in these, so would be kind of things that we that these comics would play on. And then I did another
[Guest]: series is I'm very proud of actually, if you ask me for all the content, random content creation
[Guest]: exercises done pre podcast, this will be the one I'm proudest of is a series for Pagal Gai called
[Guest]: Aapla, a Pagal look at, which was basically some 30 or 40 odd MBA careers, but told in a comic
[Guest]: format. So I actually went and spoke to like an investment banker, somebody who does market
[Guest]: research, etc, etc. I would tell you don't be funny, I will try to do that you tell me what
[Guest]: your job is. And then I would somehow find humor in there do the same. And I like as I did this,
[Guest]: I was realizing, oh, man, here's where the mad influence comes in. Here is where the
[Guest]: Anand Ramachandran influences coming in all those were like, coming together very beautifully.
[Guest]: Eventually, the series ran out of steam, because one there are only so many times you can rehash
[Guest]: the fact that MBAs faff a lot. And two, there are only so many MBA careers that are so that
[Guest]: died. But is it is it online somewhere? It is online. It's not on Pagal Gai because the site
[Guest]: is restructured. So what I have done is I've actually created because I'm too I like those
[Guest]: comics enough to put them on a website. So I've created a WordPress for this. So obviously show
[Guest]: notes. I've just put all of this and I've also picked my top 20. This is what I think are the
[Guest]: best, best of the lot. And I was very proud of this. I'm very proud of these, the comics that
[Guest]: I've done. So another thing happened along the way. And this actually is going to answer your
[Guest]: question, which is Pagal Gai was such a strong community that we used to have meetups once in a
[Guest]: while, right? Just imagine a forum where people all over the country would travel to Pune every
[Guest]: year in order to meet fly down about 100 150 odd people and they actually had to start take
[Guest]: registrations because of when you could only hold so much. Wow. Just imagine a community of
[Guest]: strangers coming together, knowing each other only by avatar and whatever. It was beautiful.
[Guest]: I'm within its heyday. Pagal Gai was the most beautiful community I could have hoped to be a
[Guest]: part of. Sadly, of course, no longer a thing now. But fair enough. A product of its time, I suppose.
[Guest]: The, the editor, he suggested why don't you take some of these jokes and try to convert them into
[Guest]: a standup set and see what happens. Fair enough. What's the worst that could happen? Because,
[Guest]: see, these are all a bunch of MBA related jokes. You say, you just say I am Bangalore and people
[Guest]: will start laughing because that's the nature of it. Everyone's in a good spirit, whatever
[Guest]: that little set I did, I was 10-15 minutes, it went way better than I could have expected.
[Guest]: Enough for me to think what if I actually took this to B-schools because I wasn't and I must
[Guest]: admit at this time, I had no idea about the Indian standup scene. I had no idea who Veerdas was or
[Guest]: Tanmay, whoever, completely removed from that scene because that Twitter was very different
[Guest]: from the Twitter that I was hanging out on. And I tried it and it worked. It kept working. It
[Guest]: kept working, Amit, till people stopped understanding IIPM jokes. Okay, yeah, that was
[Guest]: the time I realized. So this is I think the last show I did was early 2017 or 2018. So I had a
[Guest]: decent run from 2012 or so all the way to 2007. Five years I milked that set. Along the way,
[Guest]: I tried a lot of things. What the first standup show that I ever saw on video, I must admit
[Guest]: pirated video was by an English comedian called David Gorman. And it's called Google Whack.
[Guest]: Google Whacking is the practice of finding or searching for two terms, which yields just one
[Guest]: Google result. So that's called Google Whacking. And apparently it's a sport. He had a complete
[Guest]: standup set about this, which I will not get into. But what fascinated me about that was
[Guest]: the fact that he was using a projector. I've never seen any comedian before or since you do that.
[Guest]: I've seen some attempts like when AIB does like a show for something, but that is for a show. This
[Guest]: was part of his, you know, his material. And I realized how much weight that added. It wasn't
[Guest]: just supporting what he was saying it many times, it was the joke. Sometimes he would stop,
[Guest]: he click his pointer, something would change on screen, his expression will be the same.
[Guest]: And that, that was the joke by itself. You can't hear an audio version of that and laugh because
[Guest]: everything was in the visuals. I got highly inspired by that. And for a couple of years,
[Guest]: I actually made a PPT version of this because I thought, hey, what's the most MBA thing that
[Guest]: could happen? If I'm making a set on MBA jokes, might as well have a PPT accompanying it. So I
[Guest]: had a lot of fun with that. In fact, I think there might still be one video that I did from
[Guest]: I am Kozhikode in 2016 or something floating around on YouTube somewhere. Please don't link
[Guest]: that though. You've said it, so they'll find it. But I won't link it. Fair enough. No, but I have
[Guest]: but jokes apart, literally, I had a lot of fun with that. And again, I went to a lot of B schools
[Guest]: just to do this. And I had no aspirations to make this a professional thing, because I knew I would
[Guest]: eventually get tired of it. I think I had enough self awareness at that point of time, to know that
[Guest]: if this I need to take to the next level, the amount of work that I'll need to put in will be
[Guest]: exponentially higher. And I was at a stage professionally where I didn't want to do that,
[Guest]: because I knew what I was doing in my day job was fine. This thing let me have some nice memories
[Guest]: while I was at and I did, I made some great friends doing the whole thing, the most beautiful
[Guest]: thing. And there are some people from XIMB batch of 2016, who might kill me for saying this on air.
[Guest]: I did a clandestine show at XIMB, because I was flown down for an event, where the rules out of
[Guest]: respect, I will not say what the event was, but intrepid people will YouTube enough to find out
[Guest]: where strictly the rules were the people who are being invited for this cannot do anything else.
[Guest]: No commercial discussions can happen. No guest lecture, nothing of that kind. They're coming
[Guest]: only for this event and have to fly back. But this kids over there knew, hey, you do the standup set,
[Guest]: or do you mind tomorrow if you do over here, we won't tell anyone you can't publicize,
[Guest]: but we'll spread it in the hostels and all that. I thought, wow, how beautiful is that,
[Guest]: like doing us like clandestine show at a B school. So that's what I did all sorts of things like
[Guest]: this. One day, one of the most memorable days for me, and I'm just reminiscing over here randomly,
[Guest]: I'm sorry for that. In the morning, I performed at IIM Ahmedabad, in front of the very person who I
[Guest]: was making fun of, Philip, not Philip Kotler, Abraham Koshi, who co-wrote the book with him, at
[Guest]: least the version that's in India. It felt so amazing to get applause from professors and a
[Guest]: filled hall of IIM Ahmedabad students. And one of the things that I would always do, actually,
[Guest]: you know, later that day, I immediately took a flight and I performed at IIM Raipur, I think,
[Guest]: IIM Raipur or one of those. So had a whale of a time doing this. One thing I would do is I would
[Guest]: customize the jokes basis the institute so I would never take the same set to every place. I had some
[Guest]: fillers where I would always speak to students beforehand and tell me five things about your
[Guest]: college that only the students know, and people will make fun of. And these I realized over a
[Guest]: point of time, these could be a few standard things. Tell me one committee, for instance,
[Guest]: on your campus, which nobody knows what they do. And the moment it is mentioned, everybody laughs.
[Guest]: So you get in something over there. One, one B school over here, for example, had actually,
[Guest]: let's not use that because we'll get into trouble. But let's just say that there were committees that
[Guest]: everyone would laugh at, then there would be some person with some quirk or something,
[Guest]: there would be some subject that nobody understood. You, you are, you have been a B school
[Guest]: student, you know, what makes your audience, you know, what makes these guys pick, work that into
[Guest]: the set. I think that level of customizing really, really helped. Sometimes I would even take
[Guest]: pictures and put them into the slides with people's permissions, of course. And I think that
[Guest]: was fun. I think that entire period taught me a lot, again, about myself, content creation, all
[Guest]: that sort of thing. I had a whale of a time doing it on stage, the anticipation of you, I've done
[Guest]: this set about, I guess about 30 times in all in B schools across the country, and very proud of
[Guest]: that. But the nervousness that you feel just as your name is being announced, because the number
[Guest]: of things that can go wrong, because now it's not just a joke, it's also the fact that you're using
[Guest]: a damn projector that has to work laptop has to work, everything needs to sync together.
[Guest]: What if something goes wrong? You know, what if nobody laughs, which has also happened,
[Guest]: there have been times when jokes have absolutely fell flat jokes that killed it at one B school,
[Guest]: people suddenly don't like in another B school don't get at all. And like I said, the last show
[Guest]: that my only regret is that my last show was a bit of a downer, because that's when I realized
[Guest]: enough of this, because the jokes aren't working anymore. Because people don't understand the
[Guest]: context, I'm still making jokes that are relevant in 2012 13. What is that IIPM? The worst thing to
[Guest]: happen to my standup career was somebody realizing to shut down IIPM because that stopped being part
[Guest]: of cultural consciousness, and had to end that entire thing. But yeah, I tried standup. And yes,
[Guest]: on the side I had done, this gave me enough confidence to actually go and perform at your
[Guest]: regular open nights where I made the usual kind of jokes. I won a couple as well in 2017 or
[Guest]: something I'd won an open mic and stuff like that over here. And again, I don't want to sound like
[Guest]: it's coming off as bragging or anything like that. Because here's the one thing I've realized about
[Guest]: the standup circuit having been an outside participant, then an inside participant,
[Guest]: then even working for OML, which is very much involved in the comedy circuit. It's not just
[Guest]: the jokes that you make. It's also about the tenacity to stick it out for that long. It's about
[Guest]: using the same jokes over and over again, having them bomb in some place, having them succeed in
[Guest]: some place, come back night after night. And by then 2017 or so the circuit had become cutthroat
[Guest]: in terms of the slots for an open mic would go in seconds. That's how competitive the circuit
[Guest]: was at least in Bombay. And I didn't have the stomach for it anymore. Here I am pushing 30,
[Guest]: have a day job that's paying me enough. There are other things to do. I don't want to go and sit with
[Guest]: a bunch of 20 year olds pretending to laugh at everybody's jokes. Because that's not because
[Guest]: I know that's the only way to climb up this ladder organically. And I wasn't too keen on
[Guest]: shortcutting it and and and going the other way. Once I realized that the whole B-School thing
[Guest]: that time was done, I sort of like hi, it's time to hang up the standup boots, as it were.
[Guest]: A very long answer, I know, but I hope that answers the question.
[Amit Varma]: There's no answer, which is too long on the show. Yeah, on the show. That was fascinating in many
[Amit Varma]: ways, especially the fact that all these years, like those are the years stand up kind of exploded,
[Amit Varma]: right? To many, it was a question of timing. Yeah, that, you know, many early guys weren't
[Amit Varma]: really that good. They were just there at the start and they made their names. And they will be
[Guest]: the first ones to admit it, by the way. Yeah, I'm sure I'm sure they will. And some of them were
[Amit Varma]: good, but many of them were. Yes. Yeah. And it's just a kind of a sort of a question of luck.
[Guest]: Kudos to them for trying it out at a time when exactly Yeah, like right now Comicstan,
[Guest]: the show on Netflix, sorry, on Amazon Prime, it's, it's Twitter bio is convincing Indian
[Guest]: parents that comedy is a viable career or something. But yeah, we are in an age right
[Guest]: now where if you're, if you're thinking of being a comedian, you have an agency like
[Guest]: OML or somebody else who will manage you professionally. This was Wild West back in
[Guest]: 2011 12. Whenever when all these guys are so kudos to them for having the gumption to pursue
[Amit Varma]: this even if they weren't necessarily the best at. And were you tempted to kind of then enter
[Amit Varma]: the fray in that way? You know, the way that you know, tempted to go out there with the AIBs and
[Guest]: the East India Company? You talk as if I could, you talk as well. So here's the thing I realized,
[Guest]: Amit, I think I was very comfortable doing what I was doing. Right? I knew I possibly could if I
[Guest]: put in the work, if I it, it honestly, to me was really about the work. It was about the work ethic
[Guest]: to write, rewrite, perform open mics again. And again, it's really about that not saying that I'm
[Guest]: born with talent or something, but I wasn't willing to do the latter one because so much
[Guest]: competition was there too. I had too many other things happening in life in any case. And three,
[Guest]: and very importantly, I had a reasonably decent captive audience. At the end of the day, what do
[Guest]: all these kids who want to do stand up one, they want to perform in front of an audience of say,
[Guest]: a few hundred people every day, or not every day, but a few times I had done that. The here,
[Guest]: here's a very weird thing about my this very successful standup journey that I had,
[Guest]: I had gone to open mics performing to audiences of the other open micers, having performed to
[Guest]: an audience of about 500, 600, I'm about already. So when I put that in context, I realized,
[Guest]: I mean, if that was a kick, I wonder I've already got it. I hope I'm not coming off as pretentious
[Guest]: or like, pompous when I say this. The fact is, I had I took a niche at that point and took a chance
[Guest]: on it. And then suddenly people like, wait, you're gonna say b school related jokes. We want to like
[Guest]: tell me more about this. And I just wanted to have fun. I didn't charge a lot of money for this. I
[Guest]: said cover the airfare, give me a place to say give me some amount of money. I'm fine. I really
[Guest]: didn't make a lot of money doing this. For me, it was all about the experience going on meeting
[Guest]: people trying out something new. And I think that worked for that period of period of time.
[Guest]: Was I tempted to get into the space I was but when I look at the amount of work that that would have
[Guest]: entailed, which it rightly should, I wasn't willing to, let me put it that way, purely because there
[Guest]: were too many other things happening on the side, including my day job, which was going decently at
[Amit Varma]: that point of time. So yeah, again, thinking aloud, you know, people will often look at counterfactuals
[Amit Varma]: and they'll compare the road taken with the road not taken. But it's not just the road not taken,
[Amit Varma]: it's also the work not done. To take the road not taken, you would have had to change everything,
[Amit Varma]: do a lot of work in a particular direction. Yeah, you can't just view the romanticized aspects of
[Guest]: the road not taken with the mundane aspects. Absolutely, absolutely. And at the same time,
[Guest]: I think one thing's become very clear to me after speaking to a lot of comedians having worked at
[Guest]: OML, etc. The end product, which is that one hour of seeing this guy living his dream on stage and
[Guest]: all that, that is just that is the only happy hour that that person has in the day. Otherwise,
[Guest]: it is traveling, it is writing, it is constant rejection. It is paranoia, it is everything
[Guest]: because it is completely a subjective craft. And you're in the public eye. And we only we all know
[Guest]: what can happen to people in the public eye these days in the, you know, something surfacing from
[Guest]: 10 years back, whatever the case may be. These guys are in a state of constant, like it may seem
[Guest]: great on stage, wow, he's living his dreams, telling jokes, and for people who are able to do
[Guest]: that, then great. So that's the other thing that people tend to miss. And this is true of anything,
[Amit Varma]: stand up comedy, music, everything. Yeah, podcasting. So, you know, one final
[Amit Varma]: question on stand up, because I didn't know all of this. And I didn't plan to have a section on
[Guest]: stand up. I wasn't planning on saying this was part of my YouTube that I've hidden somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess now, yeah, I'll have to just now interpret, listeners will discover it and
[Amit Varma]: etc, etc. So final question, what do you think about the evolution of stand up comedy in the
[Amit Varma]: country? Like, I'll briefly give you my views on it, which are likely to be outdated, and which
[Amit Varma]: are also likely to be somewhat superficial, because I haven't seen the scene too deeply.
[Amit Varma]: But my initial view when the early stand up in English started happening, maybe a decade ago,
[Amit Varma]: was that a lot of it was derivative of Western comics, a lot of it did not really come from so
[Amit Varma]: much lived experience. No fault of many of these guys, because they were so young, a lot of it
[Amit Varma]: didn't have that authenticity, the earthiness, which comedians in the languages could bring in.
[Amit Varma]: But I saw the scene changing in the sense that recently I've seen young guys who I think are just
[Amit Varma]: really, really good. And I would imagine that that's kind of happening because the ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: is so much bigger. And when you have a bigger ecosystem, whoever emerges to the top is likely
[Amit Varma]: to be good. Also, the other aspect, which I think will play out really over 10, 15, 20 years
[Amit Varma]: is to see what happens when they age. Because a lot of the best stand up comedy that I like from
[Amit Varma]: the West is stuff where people who are in their 40s, 50s have been there, done that, a lot of
[Amit Varma]: self reflection in comedy anyway, they've changed completely, they look back on their lives. And
[Amit Varma]: that makes for the best work. I mean, even if it's not, you know, politically correct to take his
[Amit Varma]: name, Louis CK's late work is just fantastic. You know, you see Louis CK performing at 25 it is
[Amit Varma]: shit. There's nothing to laugh at. You look at him at 50. It's just a whole new level.
[Guest]: Arguably, I would say the same of Carlin as well. I wasn't a big fan of the early stuff that he
[Amit Varma]: does. What are you doing? Oh, they're just being loud. And then who can dispute the genius of the
[Amit Varma]: man later? Yeah. So I think, you know, that's what I'm waiting for. I'm waiting for someone
[Amit Varma]: like, like guys who are already very good now, like Varun Grover, Rohan Joshi, what are they
[Amit Varma]: going to be in 2030? Right? That really fascinates me, because you have much more lived experience
[Amit Varma]: you have. And artists are especially comics are given if they're good comics, tons of self
[Amit Varma]: reflection, you know, as a material of life gives a material to work with, where does that go? Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of how that scene has kind of evolved as you've seen it?
[Guest]: It's a very interesting question. Unfortunately, I don't have as nuanced an answer as I should
[Guest]: have, because I stopped following and being interested as a whole in comedy about three,
[Guest]: four years back, and I think a lot has happened since, but I can like definitely tell you what
[Guest]: happened from that. I think it was interesting, because bookending my so called stand up career
[Guest]: was the birth of open mics, they were they were struggling to fill in slots, like literally had
[Guest]: people like Rohan, picking me and asking, would you like to? Would you like we are doing an open
[Guest]: mic tomorrow? Can you come in and whatever, to a time, like I said, is selling out like IRCTC
[Guest]: Tatkal tickets, right? That is sort of like the bookending in terms of content itself. Yes,
[Guest]: you're right. A lot of it tends to be derivative from there. And I think also that was purely
[Guest]: because that was the reference point that a lot of these guys had, they would see the,
[Guest]: you know, whatever the Russell Peters or the Carlins of the world and a lot of the pop culture
[Guest]: that they consumed was also sort of like that, I think things started to change. And of course,
[Guest]: I think we have a lot of that credit has to go to Zakir Khan for that for making it cool to be
[Guest]: vulnerable in another language one. And also not classically funny. Like if you see there aren't
[Guest]: that many jokes that are littered around Zakir's comedy. And again, because my Hindi is not all
[Guest]: that great. A lot of what he says goes completely over my head. But to me, it's like what he was
[Guest]: saying about Shakespeare and sometimes poetry, the way he speaks the intonations, you can even if you
[Guest]: don't know the language, you're able to understand it because of the way that he talks. And suddenly
[Guest]: he gets you to a very serious point about a breakup that's happening at the table, where he said he's
[Guest]: leaving the audience hanging. And he's holding his hand and said anything he's going to deliver
[Guest]: a moment of shiry over here. And then he berates the waiter for putting elaichi in his biryani.
[Guest]: That was a punchline. Sorry for the spoiler. But you know, his ability to do that and be
[Guest]: relatable and all that I think he allowed people to I know a lot of people, for example, who come
[Guest]: to open mics and do stuff in Hindi, they look up to Zakir, right? You can see you can see it. And
[Guest]: if you ask them, they will definitely say Zakir bhai and the reverence that he is treated with.
[Guest]: It's sort of unmatched, at least from what I have seen. What I've also seen is that people
[Guest]: are trying other things. I think there are people trying to emerge with their own genres and styles
[Guest]: to varying degrees of success. But that's fine, right? You need those varying degrees in order
[Guest]: to have somebody like I've seen people try surreal humor, right? I've seen people go to an open mic
[Guest]: and stand for 20 seconds saying nothing, and then saying something bizarre, like I was a fly.
[Guest]: Great. I mean, he bombed but great that some people are trying stuff like this.
[Guest]: I see those kind of things emerging here and there. My guess is that the trend is continuing.
[Guest]: I saw two seasons of comic stun. And I think the guys who won or at least the top five in each
[Guest]: are easily like better than a lot of the comics we saw back in the day. In fact, the comics
[Guest]: themselves will be the first people to tell you this. They will say if you guys were back there,
[Guest]: I wouldn't have had a stand up special on Netflix or whatever it is matter of timing,
[Guest]: like you said. So that way, I think the quality of comedy will get better. I think the content
[Guest]: that they speak about also will get better all conditions willing, of course. The other thing
[Guest]: that will happen is I don't think the comedy is going to be restricted to the traditional format
[Guest]: of coming on stage and talking in front of a mic anymore, I think because the formats are so many
[Guest]: more, be it a podcast, be it a web series, the example that you often like saying Samay Raina's
[Amit Varma]: the stuff that he does with his chess casts, for example, Gaurav Kapoor's vlogs. Yes, of course,
[Guest]: of course, Gaurav Kapoor's vlogs, I think people will start doing things like this as well, which
[Guest]: is channel their humor into things that aren't, you know, going in front of a stage and like I
[Guest]: told you about my frustration of or rather being dissuaded from getting into the scene because of
[Guest]: the process that it entailed the traditional, you need to cut your teeth at open mics and then get
[Guest]: a slot somewhere and then this and then this and then this and eventually something will happen,
[Guest]: right? I think a lot of people are just bypassing that gatekeeper if you can think of that and then
[Guest]: just going and trying some experiment of their own on YouTube or something like that with a friend,
[Guest]: some of it might stick, some of it may not stick. So I think that's the other thing that's happening
[Guest]: if you're seeing how comedy is sort of is sort of going and maybe on the basis of that fame,
[Guest]: they can get a shoe in, in a open mic or something or even a show itself. So yeah,
[Guest]: that's very unstructured thoughts. And to be honest, it's a fascinating topic to explore.
[Guest]: And you should really get somebody who is a part of the who's been part of the scene on to the
[Amit Varma]: scene. And sure, at some point, and just just kind of taking off from there, like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we spoke earlier of how creators should not restrict themselves by putting them in a box.
[Unknown]: If you're a creator, you can do so many things, right? You don't just have to do one thing. And
[Amit Varma]: that speaks to also what you said about you. To do comedy, you don't just have to go on a stage
[Amit Varma]: in front of a mic and perform. And what comedians do is, you know, tease out the little things and
[Amit Varma]: the textures of everyday life that make you smile when you have a moment of recognition, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and in a sense, I look at someone like Gaurav Kapoor do his vlog. And this is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: a Delhi comedian, for listeners who might not be familiar doing his vlog. And it's exactly that
[Amit Varma]: it's just daily things his wife is shouting at him because he's left his bathroom door open.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And he had a frequent sponsor at one point, which was Mama Earth. So now when he goes to all
[Amit Varma]: his live shows, that's become a meme now. And so it's really nice how it's not a different thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's the same kind of thing, where, you know, you're taking off from everyday life and
[Guest]: kind of taking people on a journey with you. Absolutely. And that the segment I'm just going
[Guest]: to end and I want to give this as a recommendation, actually. So there are lots of these
[Guest]: comedy based web series that are doing the rounds on the net, right? And actually, some of them are
[Guest]: pretty good from whatever I've seen. There is this absolutely surreal show that 10 people in the
[Guest]: country have seen, which is called Starboys. S-T-A-R-B-O-Y-Z. Okay, it's starring Kenny Sebastian
[Guest]: and Naveen Richard, both of whom are Mallus. The whole thing is, it's like a poor parody of any of
[Guest]: the space based shows. So these guys have a spaceship of their own and they're going around
[Guest]: having their own adventures. What are these adventures? Stealing chart from somewhere,
[Guest]: this thing, that thing, all silly things. But the amount of surreal random humor that they're able
[Guest]: to bring in, the amount of things that only people from Bangalore will understand, the things that
[Guest]: only Malayalees will understand, it is an other level of, you know, whatever. All concerned have
[Guest]: said that everyone was completely sober during the making of that. I'm not quite sure whether
[Guest]: that was true of the approval process, because it is completely surreal. Highly, highly recommended
[Guest]: for anyone who, if anyone likes Monty Python and has any predilection for anything South Indian,
[Guest]: including food, I would highly recommend it. It's a short series, which you'll find on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: S-Marvellous. So let's leave comedy for the moment and go to tragedy. I mean, it's not
[Amit Varma]: exactly tragedy, but about your corporate career, so to say, like, you know, you go in there,
[Amit Varma]: trained for something, expecting something, wanting to do something, having a conception of
[Amit Varma]: what advertising and marketing involve. And then, you know, and then there is a reality of what is
[Amit Varma]: in front of you. How different was it? Did you have issues with, you know, working in corporate
[Amit Varma]: setups like that? Did you find advertising workplaces toxic, as many people have pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, and I was in advertising really briefly in the early 90s. Not in the early 90s, mid 90s, 94.
[Amit Varma]: But I sensed at different points in time that there is some truth through that. So take me
[Guest]: through your experiences and how you looked at this work. Actually, the shock came or the
[Guest]: realization came a lot before even advertising. So at Micah, I had all these dreams of wanting
[Guest]: to get into an ad agency and all that. However, the good folks at Wall Street had other plans.
[Guest]: I graduated in 2009. So I don't need to set context, I think, basically clutching at straws and taking
[Guest]: anything that we could get. Long story short, I went into a company which, let's just say that
[Guest]: we weren't a fit for each other and left in about six months. I went into a small agency,
[Guest]: far from my big dreams of working at Ogilvy or Burnett or something, two agencies that I did end
[Guest]: up working in subsequently. So a couple of interesting things happened. I never considered
[Guest]: digital as a career because, again, back in 2009, digital wasn't really a thing, right? If you told
[Guest]: me that the website Orkut or whatever, Facebook was coming up at that time, would be a serious
[Guest]: marketing platform at one point of time, I would have like, not just me, anyone would have laughed
[Guest]: anyone out of the room. And today, as the statistic goes out of every advertising dollar that is spent
[Guest]: 70 cents goes to either Facebook, Amazon or Alphabet. Meta, I should say. Anyway, so what
[Guest]: ended up happening was, I found a, or rather a friend told me that one of his friends had joined
[Guest]: a small company that did social media marketing. And he said, Hey, you are digitally savvy, right?
[Guest]: So would you like to check this out? And digitally savvy, my creds were I wrote the Micah blog for a
[Guest]: couple of years was on Pagal Gai, all those sort of things, which was apparently enough for
[Guest]: qualification at that point of time. And I joined that little company. And I actually did pretty
[Guest]: decently over there. It wasn't what I had signed up for. And when I say signed up, I mean, the
[Guest]: whole advertising thing, including Micah and all that, but I turned out to be decent at what I was
[Guest]: doing. And I sort of enjoyed it, I cut my teeth over there. And it's still the workplace that I
[Guest]: have spent the maximum amount of time in. Subsequently, I wanted, I wanted more, more,
[Guest]: not in terms of money, but more in terms of exposure, small agency, and all that the problem
[Guest]: I knew I had maxed out that, that place gave me a lot of good learnings made. I had, I had a lot
[Guest]: of good times over there. But I wanted to move on, spend two years at Ogilvy, two years at Leo
[Guest]: Bennett post that. And I think a lot of good things and bad things happen. So I shouldn't come
[Guest]: across as someone who's like super critical of, you know, advertising as a, as a whole, that is,
[Guest]: to be fair, there are lots of smart people in the industry at all levels, right, right at the junior
[Guest]: level, all the way up to the top. I mean, there's some genuinely good work that, that happens in
[Guest]: these places. That being said, it didn't take long for the tint in the rose tinted glasses to,
[Guest]: to wear off, I think a few things happened, I realized that, or let me put it this way,
[Guest]: if I may be slightly philosophical about this, if I were to sum up all problems about the way
[Guest]: advertising is done right now, not just in India, but really around the world, the focus has shifted
[Guest]: from using creativity to solve business problems, which is really what advertising was to figuring
[Guest]: out how do we retain this client. And that's a big shift, right? When you when that the needle
[Guest]: shifts from what can we do what is best for the brand to how do we keep this guy? And how do we
[Guest]: keep this? So when you start off with that as a fundamental problem, it leads to a lot of things,
[Guest]: what does it mean? So one, now we'll get down to the micro things what this translates to one,
[Guest]: it means that a resource that is technically billed as a full resource on one account and
[Guest]: being charged to the client accordingly, is actually a full resource on three different
[Guest]: accounts. So you don't need to need to explain what that will do to moral, creativity and
[Guest]: productivity, right? So that's at a fundamental level is usually the bottom rung that tends to
[Guest]: take that to there is a vast disconnect in terms of mediums and all that creative agencies, let's
[Guest]: face it are not very creative when it comes to updating their knowledge of mediums and all that.
[Guest]: And it genuinely pains me to say this, I feel no joy in trashing this industry that I was dreaming
[Guest]: to be a part of. And genuinely, it gave me some good moments and still has a lot of smart people.
[Guest]: But the bigger agencies, their default is how do we solve this with the TVC, which the world has
[Guest]: moved on from that, right? The solution to every business problem is not a 30 second spot on
[Guest]: television anymore, right? Especially if it is a digital brand. I still remember Amit, the day I
[Guest]: decided to quit working in advertising, not the day I decided to hand in my papers, but the day I
[Guest]: decided I want out of this career. It was when we were sitting in a Bangalore office at 2am.
[Guest]: We had pitch three or four days later, a very cocky client who had come into a lot of money
[Guest]: and had the gumption to say on a Thursday that I want to pitch on Monday. So you can imagine again,
[Guest]: what that does to everything. And it was a digital brand for which everyone was desperately trying to
[Guest]: find a ATL way or TV way of solving the problem, which was in my opinion, not the way to go about
[Guest]: this. I was supposed to be the quote unquote digital expert on that. But again, digital has
[Guest]: always been treated as the last two slides of the presentation, how you come along, you add some
[Guest]: Facebook ideas at the end. That was generally the approach that pissed me off after. I mean,
[Guest]: I could take it to a point. But you know, I mean, had enough of that I don't the profession and I
[Guest]: don't deserve this anymore. I want out of this. So that is like number two, like, you're outdated
[Guest]: and all that. Third is and this re I mean, this really cheesed me off the gulf between what was
[Guest]: being pitched and what was actually being executed was so vast. And both sides were okay with it.
[Guest]: It's almost like both client and agency know that the pitch is just a song and dance. And the song
[Guest]: and dance is great. We will change the world we will do this we will change not just the people's
[Guest]: perception of the brand, but we will do good for society this thing that thing everything like
[Guest]: the world was your oyster when it came to the pitch, be as creative as you want to change
[Guest]: everything. Right. And we were genuinely excited when we got the chance to do stuff like that and
[Guest]: win accounts. When the account was one it was more like heartache. That was the that was for sure.
[Guest]: Now get back to doing the same shit that any other agency would have done. It's just a matter of who
[Guest]: has quoted the lowest amount of money or whoever the CMO likes or whatever the case may be. All
[Guest]: these things after a point of time build up enough you have enough of your juniors crying about
[Guest]: everything you have enough of your bosses not understanding. And because the emphasis is more
[Guest]: on, you know, it shifted to things like headcount revenue per headcount and things like that.
[Guest]: And I personally think it's very difficult to do that in a creative business. Sure, you might
[Guest]: arguably be able to do that in manufacturing or some something like that. But definitely not in
[Guest]: an ideas, ideas business because you can't you can't provide ideas per hour like how you can
[Guest]: provide say screws per hour once you have the process process nailed down screws nailed down
[Guest]: nevermind unnecessary joke. So yeah, I think it's a combination of all these things that really
[Guest]: made me realize that create this is not a place for creativity really is a place for people who
[Guest]: can game the system. To be fair, there are people who game the system and they enjoy it. Power to
[Guest]: them. If they have figured out how to master the system and go up the ranks, generally good people
[Guest]: it's not like they were slimy or anything like that. Great for them. If they get a kick out of
[Guest]: this entire system, great, whatever makes you happy as long as you're not, you know, killing
[Guest]: anyone and some cases that if you're selling tobacco, you're literally then killing somebody.
[Guest]: So I think there's a combination of all of these things. I was also fed up with this whole I don't
[Guest]: know if I don't remember if Ambi had spoken about this on his show, but it was the charade around
[Guest]: awards. Did he speak about this by any chance? No, I don't. Yeah. So award functions are these
[Guest]: lovely things that happen in the field of advertising where they award or this is the
[Guest]: best campaign that happened in this or this or whatever, whatever. The thing is, all of this
[Guest]: is based on a submission that the agency themselves has to make, right. And if there is any respect I
[Guest]: have for anyone in an ad agency, it is people who write those cases. And Amit, I'm telling you,
[Guest]: with all due respect to you, your course, you're writing India Uncut 80,000 blogs, whatever the
[Guest]: case may be. Nobody can spin fiction like these guys. Like, goodness gracious, I have seen what
[Guest]: people can do taking a simple Twitter idea. We ran a hashtag contest suddenly becomes something
[Guest]: that changed the fortunes of the company. I had enough of the deception for a while. Like it was
[Guest]: fun at the beginning saying, okay, let's see how much we can milk this. Let's see if we can
[Guest]: have some fun with this and how much we can gas this up. At some point of time,
[Guest]: you know, reality catches up to you and you start questioning, like, why am I doing this? You know,
[Guest]: the other hilarious thing about awards is there are multiple award functions and all of them are
[Guest]: super expensive to enter, by the way, that's how basically all these publications make money like
[Guest]: AFAX and all that by holding awards, IAMII, whoever it is. It's well known that some agencies are
[Guest]: going to win certain awards, award functions and dominate that. So some other agencies won't
[Guest]: participate in those. So you basically have a system, a circle jerk, if you will, where every
[Guest]: agency is the best agency in the country, according to a different awards function.
[Guest]: You see all these things, you laugh at first, it plays on your mind. And then eventually all
[Guest]: these things come together, another brief from a client comes in, unreasonable request, whatever,
[Guest]: whatever you have enough after a point of time. And that really combination of all these things
[Guest]: is why I decided to leave advertising. Do I regret my years in advertising? Absolutely not. I think I
[Guest]: learned a lot over there again, about things that I was good at, I think I was reasonably good at
[Guest]: what I was doing. I wouldn't say I was great at it. But I think I was good at it enough to earn
[Guest]: respect of my peers. One thing I learned a lot of things and I think advertising made me extremely
[Guest]: philosophical in that sense. One, I realized that I was a different kind of lazy. And I don't mean
[Guest]: wanting to avoid work, I would get very good at preempting feedback enough to do extra work in
[Guest]: advance so that I wouldn't have to do it later. Right? So I was very good at figuring out okay,
[Guest]: the client will not like this approach. I don't want to screw my weekend over
[Guest]: giving feedback on a Friday. So I'll tell you what, I'll give you two routes now itself.
[Guest]: One crazy creative route that you want, another safer route that I know is going to work,
[Guest]: and you know will work, which is what your CM was going to select at the end of the day.
[Guest]: So I got very good at doing that. I also got very good at doing this inside the agency,
[Guest]: both to my seniors and my juniors, I would tell them, take the time, give me an extra creative,
[Guest]: the client might ask for the option. So I also realized that some things that I thought of as
[Guest]: logical was apparently a nice thing to do. I would explain to the creative folks what the business
[Guest]: was before asking them to create. In my mind, I wasn't trying to be a nice person or anything. I
[Guest]: just thought, boss, the better you understand this, the better my the easier my job becomes,
[Guest]: right? Because I don't need to spoon feed you every time. Right? Apparently, this is a good
[Guest]: thing to do. Apparently, I was a nice person to work with, because I would do things like this,
[Guest]: which tells you how low the bar is in the first place. So I would do things like this. So that's
[Guest]: why I said a different kind of lazy, I would like work very hard in one go to make my life easier
[Guest]: in the future. Basically, there was a time I going back to childhood when I my dad always used to
[Guest]: park in rivers. And that had a like very lasting impact on me. At first, I was like wondering,
[Guest]: why does he keep doing this? Why is he making it so difficult for him to park away? I just want to
[Guest]: go to the garden and play or something. Then after the trip, it becomes easier. Okay, while everyone
[Guest]: else is struggling. Okay, now I get it. I think that was a small lesson from childhood. I don't
[Guest]: think my dad even realizes that he had this impact on me because of that small, small thing. But I
[Guest]: inculcated that in some way. And I said, Listen, I am in the zone right now for me to take out
[Guest]: another 30 minutes and do this will save me two hours of work later when I need to get to the
[Guest]: zone again, all that sort of thing. So that was one thing I think I was reasonably good at. When
[Guest]: I was in advertising, I also I, I think I also learned a lot about business. I think I, I took
[Guest]: a lot of effort to understand clients, businesses. And the other thing I this this you might
[Guest]: appreciate because you always talk about joining dots. One of the things that I always try to do
[Guest]: is I would try to take lessons from one category or one brand example and see how they could be
[Guest]: applied somewhere else, right? Because there are meta lessons to be taken away from absolutely
[Guest]: everything. So you know, I would, I would do things like that I would do things like that.
[Guest]: And I've always felt amid that, especially in advertising, and I guess this might be true
[Guest]: everywhere. Gaining respect of your seniors is one thing, but I always was aiming for gaining
[Guest]: respect of juniors because once you have that, I don't know, for some reason, I always I mean,
[Guest]: I don't have a, like, as a result of doing that, my life is great right now. But I just feel that,
[Guest]: you know, I have a solid base of people who I can count on and who will vouch for me,
[Guest]: should I need something from them. And it's worked out brilliantly, like when I got into freelance,
[Guest]: for the first time, I had all these people saying, get this guy, because he'll help out when I put
[Guest]: out the course, a lot of them amplified, a lot of them signed up for it. To me, all of this was just,
[Guest]: again, complete selfishness. This was just, you know, preempting and making my life easier in the
[Guest]: future, in some way, if that sort of makes sense. So I don't regret my time in advertising, I had,
[Guest]: I think I did some good work, we had some good colleagues made some good friends over there
[Guest]: learned a lot about what my actual skills were, I wouldn't be able to do what I'm doing today, if I
[Guest]: did not go through both the good things and the bad things in in my career. But I think one of
[Guest]: the things that I was always perceptive of was where I am right now in my career, I think I was
[Guest]: very good at zooming out at all points of time. This is something that a lot of guests on Getting
[Guest]: Meta also said that like Rohan Joshi, for instance, one of the most poignant parts of his
[Guest]: interview was he was talking about when he got into stand up, and AIB became big,
[Guest]: it was sort of like a vacuum that just sucked his life so much that he was just unable to gain,
[Guest]: he was unable to sit back and see what this is doing to him, his health, his creativity,
[Guest]: everything. And only once all that crap unfortunately happened, and he was forced to
[Guest]: take a backseat, that he allowed himself to be exhausted to use his words, and put the last few
[Guest]: years and his own life in perspective. And which is why deliberately now he's creating lesser
[Guest]: content. And he has his own explanation for that, for which the episode is there for you to listen
[Guest]: to. But I think I was good at that. I think I was always very aware of where I was in career,
[Guest]: where I am right now, when I need to make a shift when I should probably stick it with
[Guest]: some more time. I had the simple philosophy, like how do you justify every month of your job
[Guest]: in your next interview? Right? So that was a simple heuristic that I had for myself at some
[Guest]: point of time. The moment you find it difficult to justify it in your next job interview,
[Guest]: you should, you should bounce. That's why I kind of left the last job that I was at Insider,
[Guest]: I was enjoying what I was doing over there, reasonably good at it. But the work I was doing
[Guest]: was took me like, almost a year or so back. And this is not disrespect to the company of people,
[Guest]: lovely people. But because of restructures and all those things, I was doing things that I
[Guest]: they didn't need to pay me what they were paying me to do what I was doing. Let me put it that way.
[Guest]: And I kept asking myself this question, right? Okay, like, suppose I'm going for an interview
[Guest]: tomorrow. And he asked, Okay, this is what you've done, but you were doing much more before. How do
[Guest]: you justify this last one year over here? If I had an answer, like, yeah, there are, you know,
[Guest]: ESOPs or some great product is coming or whatever the case may be. But I couldn't find that answer.
[Guest]: And that's when I realized, okay, I need to take a step back from you. I think that's a decent piece
[Guest]: of advice to keep like, how do you justify your what you're doing your last month? How do you
[Guest]: justify it to one potential interviewer, and two to yourself? Because it's a much more difficult
[Guest]: question to answer. I think a lot of what to do in career then sort of makes itself apparent at
[Guest]: that point of time. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: yeah, lots of fascinating stands on this, like, one of them, in fact, is the big scam that awards
[Amit Varma]: shows are like, even, even in podcasting, you know, like a few months back, there were some
[Amit Varma]: people who were boasting about being on the shortlist of a particular podcast award. So I
[Amit Varma]: went and I looked at the rules. And the thing was, you had to pay a certain sum of money.
[Amit Varma]: And everyone who paid that money was shortlisted. So you had a shortlist with whatever
[Amit Varma]: unlimited length and everyone who paid that money was shortlisted. And every podcast awards,
[Amit Varma]: basically, you have to pay a big money to enter. So it's like a circle jerk. And I think the only
[Amit Varma]: the kind of people who would enter that would typically be the kind of people who don't have
[Amit Varma]: a following anyway. I mean, I don't see if you have any self respect, why you should go in for
[Guest]: that. Yeah, absolutely. So I always think that in these creative spaces, be it podcasting,
[Guest]: be it advertising, whatever there is, there is a respect that you see on the trophy shelf. And
[Amit Varma]: then there's a respect that's a word on the street. In advertising, I remember in the 1990s,
[Amit Varma]: it used to be common practice that like there was a whole genre of advertising, which was only for
[Amit Varma]: awards. In the sense, agencies would go to a random ice cream parlor, which has one outlet
[Amit Varma]: somewhere on Grant Road, and say that there is this random magazine, and we'll run a one page
[Amit Varma]: ad for you there which nobody reads and which costs nothing. And they would enter that for
[Amit Varma]: the awards. And that would be where they would be so called creative. Yeah, absolutely. In fact,
[Guest]: this problem has only got amplified with digital with things like that. So there are awards like
[Guest]: the FAA awards for good, or the cons for good, etc. And it pains me because there are some really
[Guest]: creative campaigns that come out of that. And I don't know whether it actually changes lives or
[Guest]: anything, but whatever Amitabh Bachchan will retweet something and that becomes okay, we've
[Guest]: got like millions of reach this cause has now reached so many people and whatever it is. And
[Guest]: all activity stops right after the award has been won. It kind of breaks my heart to see things,
[Guest]: things like that. So yeah, so whether it is at a commercial level, like what you're saying,
[Guest]: which is your scam print ads, they used to be called, or be it things like this. Yeah, it's,
[Amit Varma]: it's, it's pretty rampant. Yeah. And the other thing that struck me about what you were saying
[Amit Varma]: was when you said that agencies focus shifted from doing the best possible work for their clients on
[Amit Varma]: making their product, sell or whatever, to retaining the customer. And I see this in many
[Amit Varma]: NGOs and think tanks across the country, where essentially your whole point is where are you
[Amit Varma]: getting funding from? Yes. Right. I know a candidate for CEO of a think tank I know,
[Amit Varma]: who didn't eventually take up the job because he was because he realized that the job was all going
[Amit Varma]: to be about fundraising. Yeah, it wasn't going to be about whatever the primary motive of the kind
[Amit Varma]: of NGO and what you also said about the agency pitches, and it's an incredible pitch. And but
[Amit Varma]: afterwards they don't deliver and both sides are okay with it. Yeah. And that it struck me that
[Amit Varma]: there is a principal agent kind of problem there, which comes down to incentives. Like you are
[Amit Varma]: incentivized to get the client by doing the best pitch possible. Those guys are incentivized to on
[Amit Varma]: the other side to go through the charade and pick somebody. Yeah. But after that, there are no
[Guest]: incentives to work hard, you go through the motions, you tick the boxes. Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And the sad thing is, the bigger the company is, the more likely this is to happen. Yeah,
[Guest]: the more likely this is to happen. And I just wanted to add something to the previous point
[Guest]: that you said this is about retaining the client. And when you was talking about NGOs and all that
[Guest]: and funding, it became clear to me, many times we had to sell services that we didn't think were
[Guest]: in the right interest of the client, or rather, let me not say is going to harm the client that's
[Guest]: but it's not going to add any value. And social media is a great example of that I'm an ardent
[Guest]: critic of a lot of social media marketing. And that's a possible other five hours by itself.
[Guest]: But why does a mutual fund brand need to be on Instagram in the first place, right? In your heart
[Guest]: of hearts, you know, that doesn't need to be but your job is to convince the client that it needs
[Guest]: to be done so that the agency can get another one and a half lakhs of retainer or whatever the case
[Guest]: may be. I'm not saying that this is this happens across the board or something. But this is the way
[Guest]: you know, incentives again, are sort of structured. So at some point, this breaks you down,
[Guest]: because the principles that you stand for, not just your your own moral principles,
[Guest]: but also marketing itself, like all the things that you learned, you spend so much money to
[Guest]: learn at an institute and uphold these are the things of marketing and all that. Suddenly,
[Guest]: everything all goes to pieces because of Mr. And the tragedy of it all amid this I don't let Yes,
[Guest]: sure, you might let go of some business in the short run or something. But I think that's,
[Guest]: in the long run, it's going to be good. Just imagine, I genuinely think that there is space
[Guest]: for an honest agency in the country. And when I say honest agency, I actually mean somebody who
[Guest]: says no, we will not do this for you. Because we don't think it's in the best interest of the
[Guest]: brand. It is not in our short term interest to say this, because we will potentially lose this
[Guest]: project and maybe even you as a client. But we genuinely think that this is what is going to be
[Guest]: better for your brand in the long run, stop doing this nonsense, put your money in some Google
[Guest]: search, I don't think this will help you achieve the objectives that you have right now. I think
[Guest]: in the long run, that agency is going to get a lot more calls from that CMO than somebody who just
[Guest]: goes along with the song and dance that is the scene right now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And you know, I look across media, and I don't know advertising at all anymore. But,
[Amit Varma]: you know, from what I know of media, mainstream media, newspapers, television,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that the mainstream has changed completely. If there is such a thing,
[Amit Varma]: that the way we discover content, filter content, consume content has changed completely.
[Amit Varma]: Our media houses haven't figured this out. Something's got to give something's going to
[Unknown]: give at some point, either they change or they die. That's the way of the world.
[Amit Varma]: Is it something similar in advertising? Is there radical disruption for which there is scope?
[Guest]: It's already happening. By the way, agencies are getting their lunch, dinner, snacks, everything
[Guest]: eaten by look at who are eating. First of all, there are small boutique agencies that are coming
[Guest]: up and saying we will do only this. And they're taking that business. A great example of this is
[Guest]: influencer marketing agencies. Now we can have another discussion of whether influencer marketing
[Guest]: itself is a good thing or not. But the fact of the matter is, this is stuff that creative
[Guest]: agencies should be driving. And that's being eaten away by these guys and other similar
[Guest]: specialists for various other things, right? Then you're having consultancies that are coming in
[Guest]: increasingly building their skill set, the Accenture's Accenture acquired Droga 5,
[Guest]: one of the most revered ad agencies in the world, modern ad agencies in the world right now,
[Guest]: all consultancy are stepping up their digital skills, digital skills, or not digital skills,
[Guest]: sorry, their advertising slash communication skills, and they're tying it to language that
[Guest]: the CEO understands. I was on this webinar last year, one of these marketing webinars and
[Guest]: the global head of I think it was Citibank, I forget his name, Indian guy, he was saying
[Guest]: something like the CMO is having less of a seat at the table, because he is increasingly speaking
[Guest]: in language that is not relevant to the rest of the to the rest of the company. He talks about
[Guest]: whatever the you know, metric, some impressions, this thing, that thing and all that. But boss,
[Guest]: tell me how that translates into revenue or revenue today or revenue tomorrow, whatever the
[Guest]: case may be, because what the rest of the C-suit wants to know, which is why now the CMO's role is
[Guest]: being slowly eaten away by everything else. I remember the title of that talk, it was something
[Guest]: like the make the CMO's role relevant again, or how can CMO stay relevant, something like that it
[Guest]: was, I think it was a fascinating, it's happening both of the client and, and the agency. And it's
[Guest]: also being eaten up by consultants, freelancers, for example, who are who some companies are
[Guest]: increasingly finding, hey, let's just get some honest opinions from these guys. And then we'll
[Guest]: go out and execute and all that. I work with some clients who actually have me vet agency ideas,
[Guest]: for example, right for a for example, again, I really don't want to take names or anything over
[Guest]: here. Somebody I know somebody very respected that from the space of advertising, slash marketing,
[Guest]: etc, that I know sat in on a pitch that pitch a pitch for a client that he slash she was consulting
[Guest]: with to listen to agency and these were the top agencies in the country. And the and he slash she
[Guest]: came back to me and said, is this the way they're still thinking? And it mirrored so many of my own
[Guest]: thoughts like why do they still why do they think that a TVC is the answer to everything? Why does
[Guest]: everything have the same kind of build up lead to here is our script, not even saying that we are
[Guest]: going to we think a TVC is the best thing for this just directly jumping into script, and then
[Guest]: digital is there somewhere later, right? So their lunches already being eaten is it's obsolescence
[Guest]: to some ways also comfort that these there are still legacy clients for legacy agencies that
[Guest]: will keep the coffers running something or the other will happen. Once in a while some bright
[Guest]: spark will have some idea. And there are some genuinely good ideas, which even dinosaur
[Guest]: agencies will come up with pure media might they will. Oh, this is a great campaign. This agency
[Guest]: has won award, etc. So it's that whole cycle. Again, the point is, while the business somehow
[Guest]: still seems to be surviving, I don't see talent surviving in that industry anymore. And by that,
[Guest]: what I mean is increasingly people wanting to leave. I have spoken to so many people over Okay,
[Guest]: so let me or rather, let me put it this way. I don't know a single person who works in advertising
[Guest]: that I have respect for, at my level or below who is happy with what they're doing right now,
[Guest]: or are in advertising anymore. And that's a blanket statement that I can confidently make
[Guest]: right now. Everyone wants to leave everyone wants to either move on to the client side of things,
[Guest]: everyone wants to move over to something like there are so many more creative agencies,
[Guest]: creative opportunities now with content being a thing right now people want to move to say spaces
[Guest]: like OML or something that the Bangalore startup scene is willing to absorb a lot of these,
[Guest]: many of them want to branch out as freelancers and control their own destiny in some sense.
[Guest]: So talent, I think is going to leave way before clients will, because clients like you said,
[Guest]: there's a certain comfort in running that hamster wheel. There's inertia as well. There is apps,
[Guest]: oh, there is so much inertia, there is just so much inertia for this whole thing to change.
[Guest]: They're very comfortable with the whole system, it's unlikely that change is going to come from
[Guest]: that end. Startups have already figured this out. Startups have doing things themselves
[Guest]: right now. And they will outsource a very specialist things. And yeah, that's, that's
[Guest]: the way it is. That's the way it is right now. I think the entire it again, I must say,
[Guest]: none of this gives me a sense of schadenfreude to say this. It genuinely pains me to see this
[Guest]: industry that I grew up wanting to desperately be a part of crumbling like this. And it is
[Guest]: crumbling, let me make no bones about I've been saying, this is not feasible as a business model,
[Guest]: as a business model, because your people are not happy in this anymore, you're losing your best
[Guest]: talent to others. Advertising is no longer the dream career that it once used to be there was
[Guest]: a point of time when when I was arguably wanting to get into Micah and all that way, people say,
[Guest]: Oh, I really want to work in agencies and all that. I must be wrong, by the way, I'm still
[Guest]: waiting for people to listen to this and then told me saying, Oh, I'm very happy with my job,
[Guest]: or whatever the case may be. But genuinely, in my circle, I'm not seeing this anymore. I'm seeing
[Guest]: more people whose eyes are being awakened, or they're finally accepted the fact that yeah,
[Guest]: okay, I need out from here, because there's also a sense of inertia over there as well, right? So
[Guest]: yeah, I don't see that much of a future for the traditional way in which advertising is done,
[Guest]: which is not to say that it can't be repaired or fixed. But then that's a different talk show
[Guest]: altogether. I still genuinely think that there is a role, there is a role for advertising to play,
[Guest]: which is to use creativity to solve business problems. The only thing is, I don't think
[Guest]: defaulting to TVCs is a way to do it for any book to recommend over here, which again, would be a
[Guest]: fascinating recommendation, irrespective of advertising context or not is alchemy by Rory
[Guest]: Sutherland. Rory Sutherland is actually an Ogilvy guy himself, a big name in behavioral science. So
[Guest]: anyone who anyone who's managed to read Daniel Kahneman, but wants a slightly more entertaining
[Guest]: version, this is the place to go to. It's a fascinating book, which so the full title of
[Guest]: the full Christian name of that book is alchemy, the surprising power of ideas that don't make
[Guest]: sense. And it's exactly that it is a fascinating Venn diagram intersection of creativity and
[Guest]: evolution is basically how I are human beings drawn to ideas that shouldn't make sense. Let
[Guest]: me put it like the and some of the examples he uses, I'll just use one example, which I love
[Guest]: citing again and again, suppose a sales guy wanted to establish contact with a prospect,
[Guest]: how would they go about doing it? The easiest way to do it, the cheapest way to do it. And
[Guest]: in some sense, the most guaranteed to reach way of doing it is sending them a message on a platform
[Guest]: like LinkedIn or email, right? It's cheap, it's easy, I can do it now, the person's over there,
[Guest]: I can send it immediately. What is the disadvantage of that? That same advantage holds
[Guest]: true for everybody else. That person is going to receive hundreds of emails like this. How do you
[Guest]: catch that person's attention? Write him a letter. He's going to remember that he she is going to
[Guest]: remember that for sure, right? There's a reason and he goes on to that analogy. There's a reason
[Guest]: why you don't propose over text, right? You want to make a show and dance of something. And then
[Guest]: he goes and what I love about we challenge a lot of what I think about advertising as well, right?
[Guest]: In the day and age where it is so easy to reach the exact audience that you want using all the
[Guest]: powers of digital advertising. Why do brands still want to advertise on TV? Because there's a certain
[Guest]: prestige to do that. Cred advertising on the IPL is not to reach creds audience. It is to signal
[Guest]: to creds audience that hey, we are now big enough to go on the IPL. And it was a signal to everybody
[Guest]: else that something called cred exists, you will never use cred we know, but we are around over
[Guest]: here. So it is more a signaling device than it is a strategic marketing communication sort of thing.
[Guest]: His book is filled with examples like this. And the reason I say that is some of those examples
[Guest]: are not traditional marketing ideas. One of the solutions that some there was a business district
[Guest]: somewhere in South I think it was in Argentina that needed that needed to be promoted. The ad
[Guest]: agency refused to run an ad, they said, divert the entire ad budget into building a bridge,
[Guest]: because the problem with that is not big. It's not about lack of awareness is lack of access,
[Guest]: build a bridge that will solve your business problems more than any ad campaign ever can.
[Guest]: Fantastic, right? So exactly right. And it's littered with examples. Another surprise. Now,
[Guest]: the thing is, if you think about it, these are not very creative, genius ideas. These are things that
[Guest]: should come naturally to us. If you think about it, strip away the see, the problem is also
[Guest]: defaulting to communications as a way of solving this. This there is this business problem. How do
[Guest]: we solve this? Communications is one of the way to solve that within that advertising is one way to
[Guest]: solve that within that TVC is one very outdated way to solve that. When you put it in this
[Guest]: perspective, you'll see the role of ad agencies, there is still relevance for it. It's just that
[Guest]: there's a huge mind mind mindset shift that needs to happen. The first mindset shift will be how do
[Guest]: we go back to solving business problems using creative communications, then getting out of the
[Guest]: communications part and saying, how do we solve business problems with creativity? And that
[Guest]: really, if you think about that, as a space in which ad agencies are playing with right now,
[Guest]: now look at who they are competing with. Suddenly an Ogilvy is competing with an Accenture,
[Guest]: right earlier when it is competing with a TCS, for example, who arguably think about these
[Guest]: things in a manner that the CEO understands more than anything else. So yeah, all that really is
[Guest]: distilled thoughts as to what I think the advertising industry state isn't right now,
[Guest]: at least in India, I might be completely wrong, by the way, I'd love to hear counterpoints to
[Guest]: things like this, especially on the lack of happiness at a lower level. If there's anyone
[Guest]: out there who actually enjoys what they're doing in an ad agency, genuinely, right, and they still
[Guest]: think that there is good in advertising, etc, etc. Let me know because I am I have struggled
[Amit Varma]: to find you so far. Yeah. And honestly, if anyone has contrary views to what Deepak just expressed,
[Amit Varma]: don't send a tweet, don't send an email, make a fucking TVC. That's how you can get your point
[Amit Varma]: across. Or a letter I was about to say. So you know, someday if the history of advertising is
[Amit Varma]: written, and you know, people talk about the day Indian advertising died, pin it down to really
[Amit Varma]: one event, which is also a great album title, which is the day Chuck left. So can you hear
[Amit Varma]: the guitars already? Opening riff is coming on the day Chuck left. Yeah. So epic music possible. So
[Amit Varma]: now tell me about freelancing, because you come to the stage where you are like, this is not for me,
[Amit Varma]: and you've lost faith in it. And you're freelancing. And this is a bold step, because it's a step into
[Amit Varma]: the unknown, you're giving up what is a regular income, you don't know whether your brand personal
[Amit Varma]: brand as it means anything outside of the context of working in one of these big places. Yeah. So
[Amit Varma]: what's the thought process that goes in? And then you wrote a brilliant thread on Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: which of course, I will link where you talk about all the all your advice to would be freelancers
[Guest]: from all that you have learned. So take me through a bit of that journey. Yeah, certainly. But before
[Guest]: that, I just want to like, you missed out a little bit over there. Because right after I was frustrated
[Guest]: with advertising, etc, I actually decided I went to what was I went to OML, technically. And then
[Guest]: I went to insider after that, we actually it was part of the same company just was a bit of a
[Guest]: transition because Paytm had bought over that unit, etc, etc. I have a couple of there are a couple of
[Guest]: fascinating thoughts points over here. So you jumping from advertising to what was the events
[Guest]: was a completely like completely different shift by itself. And I actually have some of the free
[Guest]: freelance work I used to do. Back in the day, one of the one of my earliest for my first byline
[Guest]: was doing gig reviews across Bombay, I used to go to small venues. And I just did it because I loved
[Guest]: attending shows. And I wanted to write something. So I used to write for a couple of magazines.
[Guest]: As a result of this, I ended up interviewing actually a lot of people from big names on the
[Guest]: scene, I guess that was somehow me trying to again, I guess it was the outsider trying to
[Guest]: desperately fit in and shortcut very quickly. I think, as I'm saying this, I see the parallels
[Guest]: with those comics I was drawing in 11th and 12th trying to fit in and trying to infuse myself in
[Amit Varma]: there very quickly. But is it hindsight or were you thinking of it that way at the time? No,
[Guest]: it was this is hindsight. This is completely hindsight. At that point of time, I just wanted to
[Guest]: try something out. I used to write for what was then a blog called Codwine. I interviewed Warren,
[Guest]: I interviewed Baiju from Mother Jane, I interviewed Mother Jane as a whole,
[Guest]: a lot. So I actually interviewed a fair bit of people like Aviyal. And it was interesting, like,
[Guest]: you know, what is small thing, I mean, it's not enough cred to, you know, get a writing gig at
[Guest]: Rolling Stone or something, but it was, it was what it was. And I, and people like knew,
[Guest]: ha ha, you wrote that article, whatever the scene is small enough for people to know, right?
[Guest]: I'd like to and then that led to another series of comics that I did, I there was a point of time
[Guest]: when I was doing very specialist comics. For Pagal Gaya, I was doing MBA comics, there was another
[Guest]: similar website called Crazy Engineers, for which I was doing engineering comics. And for OML at the
[Guest]: time, OML had a website called Indecision. Indecision, it was a beautiful name. I was doing
[Guest]: Indian rock music scene based comics. You can imagine now that's, that is niche. Super
[Guest]: specialized. Super specific and like quirks of, but I realized I was like decent at that. I take
[Guest]: one vertical, understand it fully, what are the things within that, that people care about,
[Guest]: or, you know, can make a joke about or something like that. And then make comics. I used to like
[Guest]: enjoy that little trifecta of comics that I was doing at that point. And by the way, I wasn't a
[Guest]: great cartoonist or anything. I think I was just good at, I think I always consider myself a better
[Guest]: writer than, than, than an artist. And even if you go back and see the Pagal Gaya comics, you'll
[Guest]: see that the comics by themselves, just a panel, it's like a big paragraph of text. That was the
[Guest]: sort of format that I used to love doing. But anyway, the point being, I think all those free,
[Guest]: all those gigs and all that little cred that I had built up at that point of time,
[Guest]: eventually translated into a job at OML because it was somebody who I had been in touch with at
[Guest]: that point of time was that, Hey, listen, we need somebody who has your skillset, marketing events,
[Guest]: NH7 Weekender, would you like to like, well, obviously I had enough of this. I want something
[Guest]: else. Went to OML, it had its own shares of pluses and minuses as any agency, as any company does.
[Guest]: And the reason I'm putting the story in over here is because categorically, I did not leave it on a
[Guest]: very frustrated note. I was a little burnt out with what I was doing and I had sort of like hit
[Guest]: a wall at what I was doing, but I left on extremely good terms with the team and the industry as a
[Guest]: whole. Definitely not, it would be an industry that I would go back to unlike advertising, which
[Guest]: I would not get anywhere close to with a PPE suit on as well. So with that context, yes,
[Guest]: I decided to jump into freelance in late 2018. Again, that question I asked myself, how am I
[Guest]: justifying each month in my next interview and importantly to myself and I was struggling to
[Guest]: find an answer to that. I was wondering what I could do, what I wanted to do and all that.
[Guest]: And it is very poignant. Again, I'm going to probably romanticize this more than I need to.
[Guest]: We were at an NH7 Weekender where you remember that clandestine show that I was talking about
[Guest]: a while back. So one of the guys from there, he was at that gig. Yeah, we had stayed in touch
[Guest]: partially at that point of time. And I'm seeing him after four or five years. And he said, Hey,
[Guest]: what happened to all those comics and stuff that he used to draw and all that? He said, Yeah, man,
[Guest]: stop. That was a that was a era ago. He said, Oh, that's so bad. That's so sad. Because you know,
[Guest]: I enjoyed those and you're good at doing all those things. You should try starting those once in a
[Guest]: while and all that. So yeah, but no time work, whatever, this thing, that thing. And then he
[Guest]: left it at that. But that like, I kept lingering on that. I'm like, huh, he kept saying that,
[Guest]: like, what if what if and then the post rock of God is an astronaut started playing. It's very
[Guest]: melancholy. If you're not familiar with the music, it's just very long instrumental that just
[Guest]: makes you think you know, it's that sort of that sort of thing, even without needing any specialist
[Guest]: chemicals for that. And, you know, it just, I just couldn't get what he said out of my head,
[Guest]: which is like, Hey, you should be doing something like this. And I said, Yeah, probably like,
[Guest]: I was also panicking at that point of time, because of what he said, because like,
[Guest]: this is the right time for me to try an experiment like this, because young enough to make a mistake,
[Guest]: fail and go back, like what if things, circumstances change later. Next day, I had
[Guest]: breakfast with a very good friend of mine, Sriket, who is also a co host on Simplified right now,
[Guest]: I think now we have mentioned all the hosts. The bingo that I promised them has been,
[Guest]: has been done. So we talked over it. So next morning breakfast, I said, Hey, do you have like
[Guest]: 20 minutes or something, I want to chat about something with you. And basically, he validated
[Guest]: whatever I was thinking and said, Yeah, you should like 100% jump into this right now.
[Guest]: And that's what I did. The speed at which my plan got accelerated, got executed surprised me,
[Guest]: because when leaving Weekender, which was December 2000, early December 2018, I said,
[Guest]: Okay, we I will put in my papers in or I will think about this seriously again,
[Guest]: around June, July or something like that. Reason being, the IPL was a huge event for insider
[Guest]: ticketing, etc. Work on that starts two, three months in advance, right? So you it would be a
[Guest]: fairly dick move to quit in the middle of all that. So it had to be either before or after I
[Guest]: didn't, I wasn't really thinking about before I was only thinking about let this thing get over,
[Guest]: I will quit after that. This anyway, a long period of two, three months before the festival season,
[Guest]: rather the music festival season kicks up kicks in again. Suddenly, then I thought, okay,
[Guest]: what if I do that before? Oh, but if I say April, that'd be damn bad, because then I'm leaving just
[Guest]: before the IPL. So what if it off? And then what was July became April became this became that and
[Guest]: before you know it, I put in my papers, I put in my papers, I think about a week, week and a half
[Guest]: after that gig happened. And I think I was in a mode where, listen, you need to do this,
[Guest]: might as well do it right now, because you're giving the company enough time to find a replacement. So
[Guest]: you know, I genuinely am fond of the company and what they did, I did not want to leave them in a
[Guest]: lurch. So I thought it's the best thing to do for everyone went ahead did it, what I did do was not
[Guest]: fight over my notice period, they said two months, I said I will happily serve out two months. The
[Guest]: reason being one, I wanted to make sure that everything that I did got translated down.
[Guest]: And two, I knew they wouldn't give me enough, they wouldn't give me that much amount of work. And I
[Guest]: could use that amount of time to do sort of work for I mean, put out feelers and all that for myself.
[Guest]: And they were very supportive. I have to mention that everybody like my boss, Tulika Shreyas,
[Guest]: who is now part of the product team at Paytm, all of them were extremely supportive in me doing
[Guest]: doing this. So have to thank them for, you know, for that. And yeah, that's, that's really how it
[Guest]: worked out, I think. So a few things happened, I think, here's the thing, I got into freelancing
[Guest]: already having a fair bit of work to do, because I'd done enough homework before that had enough,
[Guest]: I also had the massive insurance that I had a wife who was working and earned enough for the
[Guest]: both of us should my income for a few months be nothing, right? Thankfully, that was not the case.
[Guest]: And that really was how it how the transition happened. And because there was so much work from
[Guest]: the word go, I really didn't have a time to pause and think too much. And I did not want to because
[Guest]: I had a big vacation coming up in any case, where I went to Europe and actually saw the band that I
[Guest]: was that I'm wearing a t shirt of now. So I just slogged for six months and came back and I actually
[Guest]: have been slogging ever since I haven't actually taken a break. But that is not out of choice. And
[Guest]: that is mostly because of this ruddy virus that's doing the rounds. So yeah, that's how it started.
[Guest]: But I'm but I'm guessing you'll have some specific question within that, or even something that I
[Amit Varma]: didn't answer. No, I mean, one of the things I'm intrigued by is like, one beginning the
[Guest]: cartooning again, did you do that? In in sports, but I never really did it professionally. I think
[Guest]: I'd reached a point where I realized that, okay, there's nothing new for me to do. Right? In the
[Guest]: sense, everybody who's doing say, cartoons on politics, etc. I mean, assuming that that's a
[Guest]: sort of like a safe space anymore, is already doing it way better than I have no new angle to add to
[Guest]: this, right? At one point of time, I would do it because I needed the money at that point of time.
[Guest]: And I've done some things, by the way, which I'm not proud of, as well. I realized, hey, I don't
[Guest]: need to do this, because I am good at something, or I'm reasonably good at something, I should
[Guest]: focus my energies on that. There are some ideas that I have in terms of cartoons. But again, I
[Guest]: want it to be, if I do it, it has to be in that sort of niche, again, you know, like how b school
[Guest]: specific comics, it has to speak to a community, let me speak, let me put it that way, it has to
[Guest]: speak to a particular audience, with its particular quirks, I need to be a part of that community and
[Guest]: learn enough about it to make things specific to them and useless to everybody else. Almost,
[Guest]: I always feel that the best targeted ad is something that is so specific to what the audience
[Guest]: that is received by that it is goes completely over the heads of everybody else who is not part
[Guest]: of that part of that group. I feel the same way about this sometimes. So yeah, cartooning, no,
[Guest]: not really no plans as of now, although I do have that tablet, tablet with me. No plans to get back
[Amit Varma]: to it immediately, though. Yeah, no, that's very interesting. Because just thinking aloud,
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that as a creator, you can either aim for mass reach or high engagement. Yeah. And
[Amit Varma]: you'd know that people like us aren't really going to get mass reach. We are too, like non
[Amit Varma]: massy. So therefore, high engagement and aiming for a particular community like that is high
[Amit Varma]: engagement, like what you've got with Pagal Gai and MPAs and all of that, I guess. Now,
[Amit Varma]: in your story itself, that actually it's, it's, it's lovely to you know, if someone is listening
[Amit Varma]: to you in the last 10 minutes, and they opened that Twitter thread of yours, a lot of those
[Amit Varma]: points are really encapsulated in that like, your point one was be clear about why you're taking the
[Amit Varma]: step. Your point two was the pull has to be more important than the push, you want to do something,
[Guest]: that's where you're going. It's not because you hate your current job. That is not that. Yeah,
[Guest]: that is especially true, I would say of just forget freelancing, but even switching jobs.
[Guest]: Many times you, there's a saying, right, you quit a boss and not your job. But that's the thing,
[Guest]: if you are leaving a job because you hate the job or boss or whatever it is, what's to say the same
[Unknown]: thing won't happen in the next job. And I've seen enough of this happen. So yeah, the pull, I think
[Guest]: has to definitely be more than the push, whether it's another job, whether it's freelancing,
[Amit Varma]: whatever it is. Yeah. And then your other points all fall into place, plan for it, figure out
[Amit Varma]: finances, biz dev, etc. hustle, sell yourself in specific terms. Hustle is very interesting,
[Amit Varma]: because you know, that's one thing I can never get myself to do. I just feel embarrassed hustling.
[Amit Varma]: I so you know, or selling myself or whatever, I'm just kind of happier doing the doing what I do
[Amit Varma]: and hoping that the work speaks for itself over time. And I know that at some level,
[Amit Varma]: my mindset is on one extreme, that I have to do justice to my work by trying to make it reach more
[Amit Varma]: people. But I just just can't get that kind of hustle. How does that work for you? Like,
[Amit Varma]: to what extent do you feel? Is there such a thing as too much hustle? Do you sometimes
[Amit Varma]: pull back a little bit? Do you some like, is there a pull and a push there?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, absolutely. So when I say hustle, it's a word that's thrown around a lot these days,
[Guest]: and maybe I didn't phrase it very properly in that thread. I think by hustle, what I really
[Guest]: meant in the context of this is that, listen, boss, you're on your own right now, right?
[Guest]: Everything that you had an office and its various departments for you need to do, you have to do
[Guest]: your own finances, you need to have somebody going out. I mean, you used to have another team going
[Guest]: out and getting business for you. Guess what, you need to do that. Now, you're making fun of your
[Guest]: HR before guess what, now you need to plan your own journey and make your own excels and all that.
[Guest]: So what I meant by hustle really was more that, that you need to be comfortable doing all of these
[Guest]: kinds of things. You don't need to be an always on sales mode. I don't think that sort of hustle
[Guest]: is something that's needed. It is, I think, also completely okay, if you're not doing
[Guest]: full justice to the work that you're doing right now. Because again, I think it all goes back to
[Guest]: objectives. I think it all goes back to what do you want out of this? If you create a piece of
[Guest]: content and you feel, yeah, this has got only 1000 listens, I know in my heart of heart that this can
[Guest]: get 10,000 people. If that is enough motivation for you, you will find the hustle for it. Let me
[Guest]: put it that way, right? If it's if if the work that is needed to go from 1000 to 10,000 seems
[Guest]: like too much work for you, plain and simple, you don't want those 9000 listens enough to put in
[Guest]: that amount of work. It is simple and it is okay, it is completely okay to, it is completely okay
[Guest]: to do that. So yes, we all want, if you were to ask a podcaster, do you want 1000 listens,
[Guest]: do you want 10,000 listens? Obviously, they'll say 10,000 listens. But then what goes behind
[Guest]: getting to 1000? What goes behind getting to 10,000? Two completely different paths. And you
[Guest]: may realize you're happier with 1000, 2000, whatever it is. And I'm assuming that is what
[Guest]: might be the case for you as well, right? Yeah, I mean, there are many different parts from 1000
[Amit Varma]: to 10,000. And I would say the path I took will just keep working on the product and just keep
[Guest]: making it better. Exactly, exactly. Which is fair enough to choose the other way and say that I'll
[Guest]: just do enough marketing and gonna get a wider reach. Yeah, no. And I think that's a completely
[Guest]: legit way of doing it. And to be honest, that's kind of like what I have been doing, which I
[Guest]: haven't been actually putting out any. And also, I think the context in which both of us are talking
[Guest]: with respect to hustling slash working is different. You are a podcaster, pretty much. And
[Guest]: for me, podcast is just a side thing. And I make most of my money through whatever teaching or
[Guest]: consulting or whatever, or whatever, I have over time grown to loathe the word consulting less and
[Guest]: less for a long time, I was trying to find I can't stand that word, I need to find another
[Guest]: alternative to this. But it's okay, I have made my peace with the with the so called C word.
[Guest]: So that's what I mean by hustle in some sense. Again, I'll go back to one of the things I said
[Guest]: before about advertising, which is what do you what is your objective? What is the ideal end
[Guest]: goal that you want, or, or even like medium term goal that you want? What is stopping you right
[Guest]: now? Okay, so I think that's the simplest way of looking at even freelancing, for example,
[Guest]: okay, let's say that somebody listening to the show wants to eventually, for example, I'll take
[Guest]: my own the space that I have sort of worked in a little bit, which is they want to write for
[Guest]: a renowned music publication like pitchfork, or a Rolling Stone at that is their goal. Now,
[Guest]: is that going to happen immediately? Absolutely not, right? Unless you are very famous, or
[Guest]: whatever it is, which let's face it may not be. So now ask yourself a very simple question. And
[Guest]: this is a very uncomplicated way of going about it. What is stopping that editor from opening my
[Guest]: email or for or whatever the case may be, and then list down the reasons why one, nobody knows who I
[Guest]: am to, I don't have a published body of work in the publication that is second run to pitchfork,
[Guest]: or whatever. Or I don't have published work anywhere for that matter. Like if I don't even
[Guest]: have stuff that I vomited out onto a blog, who am I to go and submit a pitch to pitchfork for that
[Guest]: matter, or three could be that I don't have enough nuance to be able to pitch a topic of some
[Guest]: substance, whatever it is, when you list down these four or five things, then take those and
[Guest]: see, okay, what is stopping each of these. And then you will break when you do this exercise,
[Guest]: you'll eventually say, okay, I need to start writing somewhere, wherever it is, whether it
[Guest]: is on my blog for free, whether it is finding whatever your equivalent of codwine for me was
[Guest]: put something out because that byline that you have over there, I'm there are some people who
[Guest]: are opposed to doing free freelance work, I think there is a role for that. As long as you look at
[Guest]: it in the context, not from exposure, I think this is doing things for exposure. I think that's
[Guest]: rubbish. And that should never be done. It's not about exposure. I think those bylines mean
[Guest]: something for you later, you're looking at it slightly more strategically, because that fits
[Guest]: into your journey. Because of that article that you've written for somebody for free acts as
[Guest]: credibility for you when you are pitching yourself to say, a small music publication that might pay
[Guest]: you 500 rupees that access credibility for the next step, next step, next step, pitchfork.
[Guest]: Similarly, everything else falls into place exactly that you figure out what your objective
[Guest]: is either medium term, long term, whatever it is, figure out what is stopping that from happening
[Guest]: right now, break that down, go all the way down to things that you can do right now. What the
[Guest]: beauty of this is, you pretty much have a plan from zero content all the way to pitching to
[Guest]: a Rolling Stone, pretty much drawn out over a period of time, along the way, you'll figure
[Guest]: out other things are needed. Okay, he's not going to take me seriously, because I don't have a
[Guest]: say for a designer, that would be a Behance profile or something of that sort. Okay,
[Guest]: I need to build on that. Oh, okay, I don't have a website. Oh, I don't have this. I don't have
[Guest]: this. I don't have this. See, see, I'm in a stage. I'm actually in a stage like that right now,
[Guest]: because I'm, I'm at a point where I'm actually trying to do less of some kind of work and more
[Guest]: of some other kind of work. And I asked myself, see, for me, I'll contextualize for me. Like many
[Guest]: other people, I don't want to make a lot of money, I want to work fewer hours and use the remaining
[Guest]: free time to pursue other things like create more content or consume more content. Honestly, right,
[Guest]: I'll be happy working half of the day and listening and just listening to music for the rest of it.
[Guest]: That would be my dream in like about two years time. That is genuinely my dream. I don't want
[Guest]: to fancy yacht or a house in Malibu or anything like that. Now, that's a fairly achievable dream,
[Guest]: I need to ask myself, okay, for that, what do I need to do? Okay, if I'm making 2000 bucks an hour
[Guest]: right now, it needs to become 4000 bucks an hour to compensate for this. How is the client going
[Guest]: to pay me 4000 bucks an hour right now? Okay, I need to have this and then work backwards. And
[Guest]: then very tangibly, you have what you need to do in Jan 2022. That's the way I think about it. And
[Guest]: I think that I have, I mean, there are lots of frameworks and all this and all but this is the
[Guest]: way I think is the easiest way for anyone to approach because it's super flexible and it
[Amit Varma]: puts your objectives at the end of it. Yeah, I mean, I think one thing that goes
[Amit Varma]: beyond all frameworks is that what you're really talking about is asking yourself questions,
[Amit Varma]: all the way, you know, take the why to the last level and really figure out why you're doing and
[Amit Varma]: many people don't often know why they're doing what they're doing and just asking their question
[Amit Varma]: can help clarify their mind and realize that hey, yes, that's not actually what I want. What I want
[Guest]: is this. Another interesting moment in my life, I don't remember when this happened, but it was
[Guest]: the time I realized what kind of life I wanted to lead. This is a time when the I guess it was
[Guest]: I guess it was around 1516 or so when the startup boom was in all its glory. And you had, you know,
[Guest]: all like insane amounts of money coming into the ecosystem and stuff like that. And I remember
[Guest]: reading this newspaper article about somebody I might be getting the company wrong over here,
[Guest]: got promoted to the head of marketing or a very senior role in marketing at a very young age,
[Guest]: like some 32 or something like that at a fairly big e commerce company. I'm not mentioning it
[Guest]: because I'm not sure if I have the name of the company, right. It was a celebratory piece. I
[Guest]: read it and I thought, poor fuck. Like, yeah, he's gonna make a lot of money. But what is he going to
[Guest]: do with that money? And I've spoken to enough investment bankers and all that to know that
[Guest]: these guys have, like, whatever, eight, nine figure bank accounts, but they can't do anything
[Guest]: with that money. I don't want to be in that sort of situation. So when I had that reaction, this
[Guest]: was a very visceral reaction. Like, I do not want that at all. I do not want a promotion that is
[Guest]: going to have to make me work 50% harder, even if I'm going to be paid 100% more. That's when I
[Guest]: realized that it's very clear now in my head as to which path to pursue. And I think that is
[Guest]: important. I think asking the why is very, very important. We live in a day and age where like,
[Guest]: everyone's like, there's so much around, oh, you need to build a personal brand for yourself and
[Guest]: all that. No, you don't. You don't need to build a personal brand. It all depends on what your
[Guest]: objective is. The medium should never supersede the objective. This is true of marketing. And like,
[Guest]: there is no like, oh, we were the first brand to use virtual reality. So what, what did that end
[Guest]: up changing? Similarly, oh, I have a fully filled out LinkedIn profile, or I'm a LinkedIn, whatever,
[Guest]: top fighter. There are people who show off, you know, I have 40,000 connections and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Or followed by Narendra Modi is a popular thing on Twitter.
[Guest]: Like, okay, fair enough, that I can see an answer for. But for everybody else, so what, like,
[Guest]: what does this lead to? What do you like, what do you want to do? And is this the right way to solve
[Guest]: that? For somebody who just wants a regular career, grow up the ladder once in a while and
[Guest]: have some fun, go to an international vacation and have enough savings, have a good family and all
[Guest]: that. It's a nice aspirational career. You don't need to ruin their lives by telling them build a
[Guest]: personal brand for yourself, you should put out content constantly this thing, that thing,
[Guest]: you should constantly upskill this thing. No, you don't need to, you genuinely don't need to,
[Guest]: as long as you're happy doing what you're doing, as long as you have confidence that you can
[Guest]: continue doing that and not being replaced by robots or new technology or whatever it is,
[Guest]: please, by all means, stay off social media. My first boss in Ogilvy, one of the smartest people
[Guest]: I know from a digital thinking perspective was famously off social media. And I and at the same
[Guest]: time, he had a great digital brain. So there's nothing like, oh, you need to constantly create
[Guest]: content. And I think we live in a day and age, Amit, where especially youngsters, especially
[Guest]: those scary 16 year olds that I teach, they are great at sniffing out fluff. They are great at
[Guest]: sniffing out when somebody actually means it. And when somebody is actually being either paid for
[Guest]: it or putting on a persona or avatar to showcase themselves in some sense. So yeah, that's how I
[Guest]: think about these things. You know, it's just a few very simple things. One of the lessons that
[Guest]: came out from getting Meta for me, and multiple people said this in different contexts, starting
[Guest]: with Rohan Joshi, is just zoom out, like, it's very, very difficult to gain perspective of your
[Guest]: career, yourself, your goals, everything. When you're in the midst of doing this on a, you know,
[Guest]: very daily basis, step out, even if it's for a few hours, even if for a week, but spend that
[Guest]: amount of time without the without worrying what Monday is going to be like, or which client has
[Guest]: mailed you over the weekend, or whatever it is, take a step back and just evaluate what is it that
[Guest]: you want? Is this thing that you're doing? If you continue doing it, where are you going to head to?
[Guest]: Is that the logical endpoint of what you want? And I guess that's the reason why a lot of people
[Guest]: who you know, go on Vipassana or meditate or something, I suddenly find meaning, which is
[Guest]: completely different, I completely like understand what they're what they're doing right now,
[Guest]: by the way, a lot of this gyan that I might have given over the last couple of hours or so
[Guest]: is a lot of it is post facto, a lot of it is make sense now that I am out of the system. Yes,
[Guest]: I had a good sense of where career was going. But the larger picture and all that comes only when
[Guest]: you allow yourself to disconnect from the day to day. So yeah, that's another thing I would
[Guest]: encourage anybody to do whether or not it's somebody who's looking to be a creator, get into
[Guest]: freelance, even if somebody was extremely happy with what they're doing right now, just step out,
[Guest]: evaluate, I think that little exercise can lead to a lot it leads to like, possibly what content
[Guest]: should I create? Or, you know, what should I get into? Are there other fields that I can possibly
[Guest]: get into adjacencies that I can get into and all that. So yeah, wise words. And you mentioned your
[Amit Varma]: boss at Ogilvy, who was a good so great at digital marketing, but wasn't on social media himself.
[Amit Varma]: And that reminded me of the superb book by Adam Alter called Irresistible, which is about the
[Amit Varma]: addictions of social media. And I've written an essay on that, which also I linked from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes and Alter speaks about early in the book, he mentions that Steve Jobs once in 2007 or 2008,
[Unknown]: revealed that his kids weren't allowed to use an iPad. Yeah, for example, so he got it himself.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to not dwell on sort of the freelancing lessons more, I'll just link your
[Guest]: thread. Because there's nothing more to add over there. Because I think, okay, year three anniversary
[Guest]: is coming, do I need to add anything? There's not really, I think it's the same advice.
[Amit Varma]: And I especially liked point seven, which was about the matrix between love and money,
[Amit Varma]: which is something I'll just encourage everyone to go and look at, because I think it gives a
[Amit Varma]: very clear frame of looking at it. Now, one of your points was calendarize everything.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to move on from that to what is really, when I first thought of this episode, I thought,
[Amit Varma]: let's we can do an episode around productivity from all your lessons from Getting Meta,
[Amit Varma]: because this is of course, releasing on Jan 3rd, though we are recording this in the first week of
[Amit Varma]: December, but it's releasing on Jan 3rd. And I figured, okay, productivity, New Year resolution,
[Amit Varma]: it'll inspire everybody. And now anyone listening to this is thinking, bastard, you made us listen
[Amit Varma]: to three hours before you got to productivity. But here we are. So this is something I struggled
[Amit Varma]: with, because you know, like, sure. And just to kind of go back for a moment to what you said
[Amit Varma]: earlier, about asking yourself questions about what you want to do, and is what you're doing,
[Amit Varma]: getting you there. And I've kind of been through those phases of questioning myself.
[Amit Varma]: And thinking about that, what I realized at some point, just asking myself the question of what
[Amit Varma]: does happiness mean for me? Yeah. And at some point, you realize that all your youthful ambition
[Amit Varma]: was pointless. You know, many of the big dreams you had, if they actually came true,
[Amit Varma]: they won't really make you happy. And they're probably not going to happen. Because you were
[Amit Varma]: just going too far. What really gives us happiness, if you think about it, are those small moments,
[Amit Varma]: small joys. So you want to build your life around the small joys. In your case, it can be half a
[Amit Varma]: day of listening to music every day, right? And in my case, like at one point, I kind of tried to
[Amit Varma]: define happiness for myself. And I came up with three parameters, which was that I want to be in
[Amit Varma]: a room, which is a air conditioned, be full of books, and see, I want to sit on a lazy boy.
[Unknown]: Why? Yeah, and I got all of them. And then I thought that fuck it. Now I can't complain. I've
[Amit Varma]: got everything and you are on that right now. So I'm living your dream. Yeah, you're living my
[Amit Varma]: dream. So where I kind of see myself is that, you know, enjoy the process of working. Yes,
[Amit Varma]: take happiness in the small things. But within that process of working, I have a major, major,
[Amit Varma]: major discipline problem. Like people think I get a lot done because weekly podcast course and all
[Amit Varma]: that. But outside of that, if you look at me, I spend hours at my laptop every day,
[Amit Varma]: wanting to work but not being able to either I'm following rabbit holes on YouTube,
[Amit Varma]: or I'm playing online chess or whatever. So discipline is a big issue. The podcast
[Amit Varma]: means enough to me that I'm intense enough about it that I put in the work because I know how much
[Amit Varma]: it means to a lot of other people. You know, sentimental as it might sound, I know what it
[Amit Varma]: means to. So I, you know, I'm driven to do that. But that whole aspect of being self driven to do
[Amit Varma]: things doesn't come easily with other stuff for me like writing books or all the other things I
[Amit Varma]: might want to do. So how do you manage that? Like, in a thread at one point, when you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: calendarizing, you said that you can't go to sleep on Sunday night without knowing what you're doing
[Amit Varma]: for the entirety of the rest of the week. Yeah, yeah. And I'm like, boss, I aspire to that. But
[Amit Varma]: how? That's actually what's your journey towards that? Yeah, I'll tell you. Actually, I just
[Guest]: wanted to I actually had made notes of a couple of lines from getting what I wanted to say that
[Guest]: I wanted to say. And I loved how you described when you were a child, you wanted 123456 things
[Guest]: and Utsav, who I interviewed on Getting Meta and is the host of the Excellent Postcards from
[Guest]: Nowhere. He had this beautiful line, which is, if you're ever in the situation, describe your ideal
[Guest]: day. Don't describe ideal moments. Describe what your ideal day looks like. Wow. Yeah. Because
[Guest]: then you'll see, okay, I want to wake up in the morning at this time, spend an hour reading,
[Guest]: I will then exercise this thing, this thing. And then you'll see, oh, that's pretty achievable.
[Guest]: If you aim for ideal moments, then you're shooting for the moon, you know, I want
[Guest]: India's best podcast, or I want to win this award or whatever, whatever the case may be,
[Guest]: or win India's best podcast award, if we may tie a lot of things together.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing with an entry fee will have me in it.
[Guest]: So those become difficult, those become aspiration, super aspiration may be difficult. And
[Guest]: if you don't reach them, you become super sad and you beat yourself down. But an ideal day,
[Guest]: this is describe a day you wouldn't mind leading for the rest of your life. Think of it that way.
[Guest]: Right. And I think that's really what he was going towards. So he doesn't answer the question
[Guest]: that he was, but I just remembered it, which is why I took my notebook and I was scrambling to
[Amit Varma]: find a similar question that I put to my writing students to take a digression. Sorry for the
[Amit Varma]: interruption. Similar sort of thought that I share with my writing students when we talk about
[Amit Varma]: process in my last webinar is what is your perfect self? Yeah. Think of your perfect self. Yes. And
[Amit Varma]: think about the difference between what that perfect self does and you don't do. Yeah. And
[Guest]: what that perfect self doesn't do. And you do. Yeah. I mean, in fact, you had given this advice
[Guest]: to me approximately a year back when we had recorded the first episode of what ended up
[Guest]: being getting better. And I actually have to thank you for that, because I've actually been
[Guest]: utilizing that, especially on my fitness journey, which I've been like, pretty conscious of in the
[Guest]: last year, there would be times when I would snack or something, but I had already pictured
[Guest]: this avatar in my head of a super fit me, not even a super fit me, a fit me. What would that
[Guest]: person say about this little snack that you're having right now or whatever the case may be?
[Guest]: Right. And I find that is extremely disciplining for myself. So one, thank you for that. And
[Guest]: there's a nice callback to that what is happening on the calendaring thing. I think, again, as
[Guest]: weird as this may sound, I think it was born out of a couple of things. It was born out of one
[Guest]: laziness of having to figure out what to do on a day to day basis. And to anxiety, I wouldn't say
[Guest]: I'm a very anxious person, but I feel very at calm knowing what I've realized is over a period of
[Guest]: time, it's not a, it's not something that I woke up one day to, obviously, when you're at work,
[Guest]: you have to calendarize because there's so much happening. And then I realized if I just add
[Guest]: everything else to that, it just makes life a lot easier. Because what was happening at one
[Guest]: point of time was I was doing I was doing there was work. And there was, of course, multiple
[Guest]: things that are happening within work itself. And then you have other things that are happening,
[Guest]: like sometimes I'd go on weekends to teach, sometimes there'd be a gig for which I had to
[Guest]: attend, and I had to go from Goregaon to Lower Parel to watch it, etc. So instead of having to
[Guest]: meet, I just found myself using Google Calendar more and more. And over a period of time, I got
[Guest]: good at using Google Calendar. What I mean by using Google Calendar well is, if a gig is starting at
[Guest]: eight in Lower Parel, you know that you need to leave Goregaon at X amount of time. So I got good
[Guest]: at factoring that in. The other thing that I got good at factoring in is potential rework, etc.
[Guest]: that might be needed, right? If you think that a job is going to take you four hours to do,
[Guest]: account for another two hours for it for some rework or something to happen. So building up
[Guest]: little things like this is what I mean by getting better at calendaring over a period of time. I
[Guest]: think it's a combination of these things, which is a sense of anxiety of not knowing what the next
[Guest]: day holds. Because I genuinely have problems going to sleep sometimes, if I don't know what the next
[Guest]: day is, I need to know purely to fulfill my own anxiety sort of thing. It's not a, I actually
[Guest]: think it's less of a productivity thing and more of a dealing with anxiety sort of thing. Again,
[Guest]: I don't want to use the word too flippantly, because you know, it's not like I have a big
[Guest]: problem with that or something. But it's I'm using it in the in the semi casual sense in which
[Guest]: it's, you know, I was using it right now. Here's what I do. So I have a sense of,
[Guest]: okay, so actually, let me tell you the extent to which I do my calendaring. There is so and this
[Guest]: again, if anyone who wants to riff off this and make your own versions of it, please go ahead.
[Guest]: I haven't I just use it for myself. Maybe I should make a version of it or something like that and
[Guest]: put it up. I use two sheets. One is Google Calendar. And the other is what I call my sanity
[Guest]: maintainer. The sanity maintainer is every week from where we are right now, the week of December,
[Guest]: December 5, all the way for the next six months is every week. So December 5 to 12, whatever,
[Guest]: whatever, all the way to that, I have all my clients marked out, right. And I have by now
[Guest]: a reasonable sense of how much time I'm spending on each of them. Actually, there are three sheets,
[Guest]: I'll get to that, you know, because all of it needs to make sense together. So for every client,
[Guest]: I put in, okay, this summer, this client, I'm going to spend five hours a week working on
[Guest]: tongue, tongue, tongue, tongue, tongue, you put it in for the amount of time, you know,
[Guest]: you're definitely going to work for them on sheet number three, which is my expenses and finance
[Guest]: sheet, I put in how much money that is going to make me right. And where this work is done is
[Guest]: done on Google Calendar. Again, I know this seems like a bit of work, but do it for a couple of
[Guest]: weeks, and this becomes second nature, replicate this everywhere. And at the end of spending two
[Guest]: hours, for the first time doing this entire process, what you end up having is this apart
[Guest]: from the peace of mind and all that you have a decent sense of how your next few months look,
[Guest]: this works for me, because I work on a freelance level, I must mention this may not work at the
[Guest]: office level, or something like this is how I do it, please contextualize for your own situations,
[Guest]: etc. So this includes the clients that I'm working on, etc. So I've, I try to keep a limit of x,
[Guest]: like 40 hours a week, I'm going to actively work, right, that 40 hours needs to be split across so
[Guest]: many clients, this might come later, this is likely to happen, you do all those permutations
[Guest]: and combinations. What this gives you is you have a decent sense of how much you're going to be
[Guest]: working over the next few months, right? It gives you how much that work is going to translate to
[Guest]: in terms of income, which let's face it is the basis of life itself, right? There is a subsequent
[Guest]: sheet where I break down month by month, how much what are the expenses that are going to happen
[Guest]: next year, this thing, that thing, vacation, contingency fund, and all that. Google Sheet is
[Guest]: where this meets week on week, every week on Sunday, or whatever it is, I adjust, I actually
[Guest]: have some clients are recurring. So I have like a sort of recurring block, which every week, I just
[Guest]: drag and drop into various places. So at the end of this exercise, again, I know it sounds like a
[Guest]: lot. But again, this just becomes second nature after a point of time, I have excellent visibility
[Guest]: over what the next couple of weeks look like, I have decent visibility over what the next few,
[Guest]: I have good visibility rather over what the next two months look like. And I have decent visibility
[Guest]: over the next six months look like, what do I mean by decent visibility, again, all this stems from
[Guest]: me wanting to reduce stress, anxiety, all that. One of the things I realized in 2020, that gives
[Guest]: me a lot of stress is being unable to commit to a project, because I don't know whether I'll be able
[Guest]: to take it on. And I have been in situations where I've taken things on because they sound
[Guest]: interesting. And then I realized I'm scrambling to do this. And suddenly, again, what seemed like
[Guest]: an interesting project has ended up becoming how do I get this damn thing done and finished with,
[Guest]: right? So I've realized I need to stop doing that, no matter how interesting the project sounds.
[Guest]: I have realized that I will take up a project only have x number of free hours per week,
[Guest]: right? Like I said, I'm working 40 hours after I deduct my existing clients right now. Suppose
[Guest]: there are 35 hours, right? So that means I have five hours free. Now I have a choice,
[Guest]: either I can assume that that five hours is not going to go into rework or whatever it is,
[Guest]: or other admin work that I may need to take care of or something like that.
[Guest]: Or I can take on a client for five hours per week, right? Now that's a call I will decide to take.
[Guest]: For now, I've just kept I find that imposing artificial policies on yourself are a great way of just cutting to decisions, right?
[Guest]: For me right now, that is if it is less than 10 hours, I'm not going to take it I can I will not
[Guest]: take on a project if that is the available time is less than 10 because it will get subsumed
[Guest]: into something else or the other worst case scenario if I am in a situation where
[Guest]: those 10 hours are there great use them for learning or there will be some client or the other
[Guest]: who wants something done immediately which I'll be able to turn on whatever so all this analysis
[Guest]: etc etc I've done I have also then factored in when exercise is going to happen give yourself
[Guest]: as few variables as possible one thing I realized when I used to do exercise last year is that I
[Guest]: used to do it at my own time I used to do cult workouts or whatever and I was terrible at that
[Guest]: terrible at that make one decision less join an online class where you have to join at 7 a.m or
[Guest]: 6 p.m whatever the case may be commit to that reduce the variables again I cannot believe I
[Guest]: am espousing Mark Zuckerberg a second time on a podcast but that thing that he once said that I
[Guest]: wear only great shirts because it's one decision I need to make less it's a little extreme but I
[Amit Varma]: see where he's coming from he's got that from Steve Jobs black turtleneck and jeans and Jobs
[Guest]: got that from Einstein who wore the same suit every day so yeah again a little extreme but I
[Guest]: see where they're coming from with respect to that give yourself as few variables for these things
[Guest]: as possible and yeah that's really where it is I think this obsessive calendaring that I have
[Guest]: stems from me needing to deal with anxiety in some sense it also makes life very easy for me
[Guest]: because now if somebody pings me and says hey do you have time for a project I can say no
[Guest]: before I would do the whole song and dance ha let us talk we'll figure I'll try to whatever
[Guest]: before you know it three four hours have gone in the whole song and dance I can just say no right
[Guest]: now sorry I don't have the time to do this right now the earliest I will be able to do this is
[Guest]: April 2022 I know it sounds absurd but that is really when I'll be able to do it free you tell
[Guest]: me whether it works for you or not and I'll contact you in March it's reached a point where I
[Guest]: can do that now to the point where I've actually written this out in a google doc somewhere again
[Guest]: make life easier for yourself in the future customize it to whatever said person has said
[Guest]: etc and push it out so all these things together as you can see I live on G suite as you can see
[Guest]: it's a combination of sheets is a combination of calendar nothing is geeky I think over here I think
[Guest]: everything over here is manageable by everybody however unlike many of the other things I wouldn't
[Guest]: say this is something that I would necessarily recommend for everybody this works for me
[Guest]: I know that calendaring doesn't work for a lot of people for example again one of the folks I had
[Guest]: interviewed who was the month the month parikh who is the ceo and founder of the better India
[Guest]: and that excellent publication the better home the sustainable home cleaning products he said
[Guest]: he can't work by calendar he needs randomness in his life great then my advice would be figure out
[Guest]: what works for you the other things to figure out what works for you is when do you work the best
[Guest]: like when are you good with creative ideas when are you good with strategy planning that sort of
[Guest]: thing and when are you good at doing the admin sort of work is that a time in the day is that a
[Guest]: day in the week all these sort of things again being a freelancer allows you to the flexibility
[Guest]: to chart all these things out maybe won't be possible in a you know you know day job situation
[Guest]: but even then I think it is possible to some extent I was notorious at work for not replying
[Guest]: on slack immediately because I would keep slack off it was such a distraction for me
[Guest]: that I always rationalize if it's that urgent people will come over to my desk and tell me
[Guest]: otherwise if it's just I need an updated piece of copy over here I will get to it and I will deliver
[Guest]: it properly when I get to it the sort of message that I was trying to send across and I hope I was
[Guest]: successful at this is that I will not get to your work right now because I'm focusing on something
[Guest]: else but what that I will guarantee is when I get to your work I will focus on that and I won't be
[Guest]: distracted by something else and you will get it at the time I have promised you I think I managed
[Guest]: to build that up over a period of time it's very difficult to do in this day and age where everybody
[Guest]: is on slack and assume to or whatsapp which is now very tragically devolved into being work
[Guest]: communication but you know if you set boundaries for yourself like I think again going back to
[Guest]: advertising there is this you know sometimes people are mocked if they leave on time you know
[Guest]: it's a it's a way and I'm pretty sure this is true of many startups as well but as long as
[Guest]: work is being delivered I don't think anyone should feel shy of leaving office at 6 p.m or
[Guest]: whatever as long as work is being done for me sometimes that was needed because I valued my
[Guest]: free time so much and sometimes out of desperation because I had to travel on weekends to conduct
[Guest]: classes and all that so I knew I needed to slog my ass off on the weekdays so that I wouldn't get
[Guest]: interrupted on weekends if there is one advice I have for working professional it is guard your
[Guest]: free time zealously like Krish Ashok had this beautiful line that he gave in his TEDx talk
[Guest]: long back which was I work very hard for my free time and I use that as my favorite quotes on
[Amit Varma]: Facebook for a long period of time so do you calendarize your free time in terms of this is
[Amit Varma]: my reading time this is spending time with wife this is when I'm allowed to surf YouTube and all
[Guest]: of that yeah I think it gets a little ridiculous if you go down to that level because I think then
[Guest]: that takes spontaneity out of what could happen right if I go down to the level of I have a broad
[Guest]: idea like in a week okay broadly this is what happens and I think over a period of time I've
[Guest]: adjusted and figured out there are some things that I need to calendarize like tomorrow for
[Guest]: instance I'm recording a simplified series I'm doing for three hours which ironically we're
[Guest]: going to do three episodes on and this is likely to be much longer than one episode so that I will
[Guest]: factor in right even though technically that falls under the ambit of so-called free time because it
[Guest]: falls outside work work as such I don't go down to that level I think I've reached a routine for
[Guest]: reading and all that I think it averages out over a week right I wake up in the morning I do a little
[Guest]: bit of reading before working out etc and again that is it's it sounds it sounds like I got it
[Guest]: all super sorted because I wake up at six and read for an hour before getting into exercise
[Guest]: but mostly that waking up happens because I have a cat that won't stop making noise after six
[Guest]: unless she's fed so as a result of that I need to go to sleep at 11 so that I can get the required
[Guest]: seven hours or whatever it is so that yeah all that so some of this is by circumstance make the
[Guest]: best of the situation I always say so I don't go down to the level of doing it that way there are
[Guest]: so there are times like a good chunk of weekend mornings are purely for reading and reading
[Guest]: certain kinds of things like wired fast company I thoroughly enjoy that sort of that sort of thing
[Guest]: the consumption of politics related content has gone down a fair bit over the last year or so and
[Guest]: a lot of stuff around not so much around marketing really a lot of stuff around me I still have a lot
[Guest]: of getting there to do that I mean I'm still like figuring a lot of things out I still don't think
[Guest]: I'm at that ideal schedule just yet but I think one of the things of growing old is figuring out
[Guest]: that there will never be a perfect day I think you have to let go of this fantasy that you're
[Guest]: going to be able to do everything read every book listen to every band etc and just make the most
[Guest]: out of you know whatever it is that you are doing at any point of time so I've cut down on there
[Guest]: used to point to be a point of time I used to save everything that I wanted to read and obsess
[Guest]: over it and get very disappointed if I didn't manage to read 20 articles a day or whatever it
[Guest]: is I've let that go because I've realized that if I just managed to read one of them and have
[Guest]: managed to take an import from there that is more than enough what I do now is I wait for for every
[Guest]: month I purge I purge a to read pocket everything start from a fresh slate it's okay if it is that
[Guest]: mind-changing or whatever it will resurface at some point of time great content has a way of
[Guest]: coming back the book I'm reading right now the singularity is nearly cause wheel is the result
[Guest]: of that I've always wanted to read it and I like how we will get to it eventually but it just kept
[Guest]: coming up so many times I couldn't ignore it anymore so that's the way I think about some
[Guest]: of these things as you can see a lot of this is extremely WIP I don't think I am there yet and I
[Guest]: just wanted to put one note on productivity because that's also somehow become a bad word
[Guest]: right now it really depends on what your definition of productivity is and what you want to do again
[Guest]: all goes back to what do I want to do if you're the kind of person who wants to work for every
[Guest]: single hour or maximize every moment great go for it right may not be the definition for everybody
[Guest]: and take any success story that you see with their context in mind right if you go on to medium and
[Guest]: you see a VC writing about how I made fifteen thousand dollars a day in my first job or
[Guest]: something that one might not be something that you want to do and to remember his or her context
[Guest]: there's a difference you sitting in Trivandrum doing something and that person having a lot of
[Guest]: white privilege or whatever going to Stanford having parents who are also VCs there's a
[Guest]: difference in all this so contextualize everything and figure out really what productivity happiness
[Amit Varma]: everything means for you I think it all boils down to that fantastic so you know you when you
[Amit Varma]: started off it was very inspiring but now it's fucking scary the level of talent now it's just
[Guest]: scary no but that's the thing if okay let me put it this way Amit if no I'm kind of kidding I mean
[Guest]: I know you are I know you are but for those who might be taking that seriously if calendarizing
[Guest]: this is another thing I've realized if the process to make your stress less is adding more stress
[Guest]: get rid of that process I've done that there are things I try to mic I mean the process that I'm
[Guest]: laying down right now there were two three other things that I used to do managing that became a
[Guest]: headache by itself I realized I don't need to go to that level right and I've let that go and life
[Guest]: has been a lot simpler less and sure I don't know every fractional second how much I'm working I
[Guest]: used to actually tabulate five hours a week am I actually spending five so I used to do that but I
[Guest]: realize that is too much I mean that's adding another stress layer level of process that is
[Amit Varma]: not needed at all in fact there's something I say in a writing context which is now relevant here
[Amit Varma]: and in a writing context what I say is you know my students are talking about all the choices that
[Amit Varma]: they make during a piece and all of that and what I keep pointing out is that every choice that you
[Amit Varma]: make in a particular piece you write has to have a purpose and if you're not mindful of it choices
[Amit Varma]: are being made anyway yeah but they're being made in random ways for example just the sound of the
[Amit Varma]: piece you know people say that do I do I really need to care about the sound and my point is look
[Amit Varma]: your piece has a sound sound everything you write has a music to it yes either it is noise or it is
[Amit Varma]: not noise at the very least yes and the point is that if you don't think about it chances are it
[Amit Varma]: will be noise yeah it's so it's up to you so similarly when it comes to the texture of yours
[Amit Varma]: that is that's a lovely observation and similarly I agree with reference to what you said you know
[Amit Varma]: the perfect me could assuage the scared me by saying that look every day has a schedule anyway
[Amit Varma]: either it is a random chaotic schedule that you don't think about and which just happens and you're
[Amit Varma]: a victim your passive thing the world life is happening to you or you take charge of it and
[Guest]: you make your own schedule and what's a better option and let's obviously make your own schedule
[Guest]: absolutely but I just want to address a couple of the things that you said I don't know whether
[Guest]: this will help you or not but if I were in your situation and I had that the one thing I would
[Guest]: genuinely do is if I felt like I needed to go off on YouTube or something or whatever I would
[Guest]: actually give into that temptation rather than feel bad about it because what ends up happening
[Guest]: over there is neither do I enjoy the content neither do I end up getting work done right so
[Guest]: I would actually if again now I'm saying this for me because I am that kind of calendarizing kind of
[Guest]: person I would work one hour of random YouTubing into my schedule yeah I would say I will work
[Guest]: from 10 to 12 after that I'm going to reward myself with one hour of I don't want any productivity to
[Guest]: come out of that if I just sit and do nothing or if I want mindless content at the end of it
[Guest]: I'm happy with that I don't want to see in the unseen episode to come out of this I don't want
[Guest]: dots to join in my head this is completely guilty pleasure that I have earned but after that I will
[Guest]: get back to work I think if you compartmentalize it that way at least that's the way it's worked
[Guest]: for me it's it's certainly helped me because it John Lennon has a great saying right time that you
[Guest]: enjoyed wasting was not time wasted something of that sort and I feel that is very very true
[Guest]: because you are neither doing justice to the art that you're consuming let's face it it is
[Guest]: art at some way neither are you doing justice to the work that you're doing it is an inefficient
[Guest]: around the board you have two choices either you can give in and binge like this without guilt or
[Guest]: go the other way say okay let me just get rid of this for now I'll save all these let me slog and
[Guest]: finish this thing off and then reward myself by watching this I think either approach would work
[Guest]: that's the way I do it another thing that I do which has worked for me in in my profession at
[Guest]: least the kind of work that I do a lot is I do a lot of my thinking away from the computer actually
[Guest]: I actually use a lot of notebook and paper I all the thinking typically happens when there is no
[Guest]: device around me and I find that extremely liberating because you are giving you are
[Guest]: one of course distraction free two you are also forced to think without the internet which is
[Guest]: actually a great training ground especially when you're working marketing I deliberately put in
[Guest]: some questions okay I need to verify this like if I say okay augmented reality can be used in this
[Guest]: way suppose the point I'm making okay just check whether this is possible when you go back to
[Guest]: computer just check this yeah and and I go back and I do just execution on the computer at least
[Guest]: that's the way I try to work and this worked out reasonably well for me so you know what you said
[Amit Varma]: about sort of scheduling my guilty pleasure whether it's YouTube online chess makes a lot
[Amit Varma]: of sense and the next question I come to is handling social media like one of my close friends
[Amit Varma]: shout out to Gautam John has this habit where there's a particular hour in a day where he will
[Amit Varma]: do social media yeah the rest of the time his phone is only for calls that's it and he's also
[Amit Varma]: by the way intermittent fasting one meal a day kind of person so incredibly disciplined and
[Amit Varma]: accomplished in other ways and I find that very inspiring but in general how does one tackle
[Amit Varma]: social media because with all of these like when you were speaking of calendarization while it was
[Amit Varma]: scary there was a part of me which said that I am actually obsessive and geeky enough to
[Amit Varma]: calendarize everything but will I do it because then I will sit down in front of the computer and
[Amit Varma]: I will say hey let me play one game of chess and then time just gets kind of sucked away and the
[Guest]: biggest time sink really there is kind of social media so what are your sort of ways of dealing
[Guest]: with that so I think it starts again I hate to say this for everything but I think it goes back to
[Guest]: objectives like what are you using social media for I think different people use it for different
[Guest]: reasons right some people would want to see what their friends are up to some people want to just
[Guest]: give in to what is happening on twitter these days and be you know roll up their sleeves for a good
[Guest]: fight sort of thing other people might actually go there to seek inspiration and or to give
[Guest]: inspiration whatever the case may be and other people might just need a five minute break once
[Guest]: in a while and just see some stories whatever whatever and go back it is that last mentioned
[Guest]: thing that tends to spiral out of control and that five minutes ends up becoming 10 minutes
[Guest]: becomes 15 minutes whatever whatever whatever maybe leads to some sort of anxiety because you
[Guest]: read some news from somewhere whatever it is I try to avoid that as much as possible genuinely
[Guest]: speaking and I have gotten to the point where I pretty much open up social media only when I go
[Guest]: to the loo or something like that and of course during free time I keep it open just to see what
[Guest]: happens I think my usage of social media has gone down and has become extremely inconsistent and I
[Guest]: don't mind that at all because I think the conversations with people that I really care
[Guest]: about happen on whatsapp and other medium that I'm extremely asynchronous on I think and I don't
[Guest]: regret that at all when I go on to twitter it's usually just see what's happening on the timeline
[Guest]: maybe and the timeline at any point of time gives me a sense of okay should I is there anything over
[Guest]: here worth replying to or whatever and now I've realized to leave trolls alone this thing then
[Guest]: whatever sometimes somebody's nice enough to write in and say the podcast was nice whatever so engage
[Guest]: in a conversation with them or reply to them come back later whatever the case maybe sometimes
[Guest]: something random happens today something beautiful happened Tony was complaining about his fan or
[Guest]: something like that turns out I had the exact same thing but I didn't know whether there was a fan
[Guest]: issue he said I was confused he said paging your wife for help whatever whatever all that sort of
[Guest]: so it ended up being this delightful very random twitter golden era ish thread that that just ran
[Guest]: dumbly happened so this I think would happen for a sum total of about 30 minutes a day which I think
[Guest]: is okay I don't think I'm social media addicted one thing I do do is I actually log out and I
[Guest]: feel that is extremely liberating log out and don't remember password and keep a very long
[Guest]: complicated password here's what I've realized happens when you open up by instinct ctrl t
[Guest]: and put t into the chrome or whatever browser user bar twitter loads up it is astonishing at
[Guest]: least for me how much I like I say oh I need to enter my long email id and my long complicated
[Guest]: password screw it yeah let's just like whatever close it and move on like for me I have been
[Guest]: shocked by how much this has worked for me and if you do it on phone another level because typing
[Guest]: out a password on even swift key is infinite time more difficult than on a keyboard for me that's
[Guest]: how I control it genuinely speaking that's how I that's that's how I control it but I think honestly
[Guest]: the biggest thing is I've just been dissociated from the for me let me put it this way Amit I
[Guest]: think the appeal of social media has gone away for me in many ways right once in a while get
[Guest]: onto twitter see something's happening great if that happens some people reply reply to them
[Guest]: asynchronous as and when it happens great sometimes once in a while I might put out a thread or
[Guest]: something that warrants some sort of reaction maybe I mean we're all content creators we want
[Guest]: validation you go back see where people have retweeted like commented whatever it is like
[Guest]: that freelance thread I wrote I was very active on twitter for those two like last last week I put
[Guest]: out a thread about my headphone journey something was completely random how I graduated from say
[Guest]: 500 rupee headphones that I had in college to a very expensive pair that I just bought right now
[Guest]: which was my dream for a few years and all that I just put it out because I just wanted to put it
[Guest]: out over there but I didn't realize the amount of love that it got because people contextualize that
[Guest]: into their own dreams that they had for me it was headphones or somebody else it was a bike or
[Guest]: whatever it is great so I spent a lot of time replying to that and all that this happens maybe
[Guest]: once a month or or so so as you can see it's fairly inconsistent I'd like to think that I'm
[Guest]: not very distracted by social media because I I think I've built that discipline in over a period
[Guest]: of time also I have get my kicks more out of other things now if I need a dopamine rush I'd rather
[Guest]: listen to a good song which happens very very often rather than just get on to social or something I
[Guest]: have genuinely gotten the habit now more of listening to if I need a distraction I'll either
[Guest]: listen to something on my system or load up something on YouTube maybe even listen to a cover
[Guest]: or something like that got into that habit get those five minutes out of the way get back to work
[Guest]: so rather than get that fix from social genuinely don't know what the when I logged on to Facebook
[Guest]: for the last time was LinkedIn though I don't use too much in any case to be honest that's really
[Guest]: about it I think I'm it makes me feel bad in some way because there are a lot of friends out there
[Guest]: putting up I feel like I want to go back to the good old times on social where it was really about
[Guest]: friends and less about posturing and content creation in that sense and I'm extremely guilty
[Guest]: of it because I have so much content which I keep spamming so to so apologies to all my followers
[Guest]: for these double standards that I have right now but yeah I think overall just to answer your
[Guest]: question I think I'm lucky enough to have somehow managed to de-addict myself from social yeah while
[Amit Varma]: you were speaking I thought oh shit he's he's going to judge my audio technica headphones
[Amit Varma]: so not at all these are great headphones these are good studio headphones mx the m50 m20 m20 yeah
[Amit Varma]: I mean whatever yeah the entire family is great that entire family because I just you know monitor
[Guest]: headphones and you don't want anything enhanced but Amit I will not let you forget this you
[Guest]: scolded me during the first episode of getting meta for recording with open back headphones and
[Guest]: I remember the look on your face it was aghast I could have said I you know I joined a ex-brigade
[Guest]: or something and you would have said okay do what live whatever experience you want but using open
[Guest]: back headphones while recording my first podcast episode I saw like no no go and get go and get
[Amit Varma]: your closed no no I think so what happened was that when he was recording the first episode of
[Amit Varma]: getting meta last year in December though it released much later I could hear a sound bleeding
[Amit Varma]: from his speaker I mean the reason podcasters use headphones is if you're using speakers sound
[Amit Varma]: bleeds from the speaker to the mic and you have an echo so all podcasters know you have to use
[Amit Varma]: headphones so he was using headphones but sound was still bleeding so it was a natural like
[Amit Varma]: elementary my dear Watson kind of moment that oh okay you must be using open back headphones so
[Amit Varma]: nothing there but I I have I think a resting face that is between a resting sad face and a resting
[Amit Varma]: angry face so people often misunderstand whatever so I wasn't angry that's what you look stern more
[Amit Varma]: than angry which I think is a better okay let's move on resting stern face yeah no I mean I
[Amit Varma]: appreciate these hacks you shared I must try this logout hack like one hack I tried three years ago
[Amit Varma]: when you know I had a really good routine I would get up at in the morning at 5 30 go running for a
[Amit Varma]: while go to a go to a Starbucks at 7 right between 7 and 12 and then come back and do Pragati work I
[Amit Varma]: was editing it at that time and what I would do between 7 and 12 is I didn't take my regular
[Amit Varma]: laptop I took a laptop I got for 9000 rupees an eyeball laptop which did which did not have wi-fi
[Amit Varma]: or wi-fi didn't work so it couldn't connect to the internet so you get it so I what can I get
[Amit Varma]: distracted by it was a pure writing machine there is nothing else to be distracted by it's like it's
[Guest]: like what makes reading on a kindle great apart from features and all that is the fact that there
[Guest]: is no distraction there's nothing else that that bug is a feature yeah that bug is absolutely a
[Guest]: feature and if you have ever used the the experimental browser on a kindle you will
[Amit Varma]: not want to browse the internet again anyway that's that's you don't even have to log out
[Amit Varma]: of social media there's no way you're getting on that thing yeah no so I I wrote half a novel
[Amit Varma]: during that period which I have to get back to and complete at some point and perhaps all this
[Amit Varma]: advice will help but kind of speaking of that earlier before this and this is really the last
[Amit Varma]: strand after this I'll let you go but it's a it's a strand that it's it's kind of important to me in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that you spoke about how you will give yourself time off the computer and if you're
[Amit Varma]: reading a book you'll just sit with pen and paper and you'll write stuff down and that's great and
[Amit Varma]: what I sort of find a dilemma for me is when I'm reading fiction that's fine I don't even need to
[Amit Varma]: take any notes I'm just enjoying I'm reading the book but when I'm reading non-fiction I find it
[Amit Varma]: important to take notes and I use Rome research with all its nested entries and bi-directional
[Amit Varma]: linking and it's just so useful and so powerful and I kind of like to kind of take notes in that
[Amit Varma]: and that just clarifies my thinking there's a dual side to that one side is that every time you take
[Amit Varma]: a note you are mentally taking yourself out you know you were in a concentrated state reading the
[Amit Varma]: book you take yourself out of that take a note go back and I have to do a lot of reading for research
[Amit Varma]: so I've kind of gotten used to it and I can manage that but the other thing is that if I was to get
[Amit Varma]: away with a pen and paper while reading a book I would not be able to take those kind of notes
[Amit Varma]: that's true so but regardless of that I mean I'm not asking for a solution to that I'm actually
[Amit Varma]: really happy with Rome research but what are your systems of knowledge management because one you
[Amit Varma]: are taking in a lot of knowledge on various subjects and it's almost part of what you do
[Amit Varma]: because getting meta about those things makes you better as a creator and also you teach some of that
[Amit Varma]: stuff so how do you do your knowledge management how do you what do you think about information
[Guest]: retention and all of all of those sort of processes this is again a phrase that I have come
[Guest]: to love after speaking to you and Ashok for such a long time we just go back to first principles
[Guest]: right have a few pieces of knowledge from which you know even if you wake up 10 years later
[Guest]: will still be the same in a sense strip away everything else right I and it's amazing how
[Guest]: useful that piece of advice has been for everything including like say marketing right I think that
[Guest]: for example a good marketing strategy will be the same in 2010 2020 1950 whatever the mediums might
[Guest]: change right the mediums will change but the objective of what those things are going to be
[Guest]: and the strategy etc will remain the same I find stripping these things away very very useful
[Guest]: I retain those few things so firstly I don't use the system I tried Rome research for a while
[Guest]: and maybe it's my fault because I didn't give it enough time and I was impatient and all that so
[Guest]: that's my mistake it seems like a great tool I've seen great things written about it etc so
[Guest]: including from you of course so I think that's one of the things I will try in 2022 for sure
[Guest]: so I don't have a system as such but I'll tell you what works for me I constantly validate or
[Guest]: invalidate anything that I have read or listened to etc against what I already know for example if
[Guest]: I come across in the field of marketing if I come across a new example I say yeah okay it fits with
[Guest]: that with this angle added to it so I don't know exactly how to call this but it's it's led to a
[Guest]: it's led to a system now where I can okay you if you need an example of how Instagram was used in
[Guest]: a creative way for this particular industry I'll just uh yeah okay got it yeah okay here's the
[Guest]: example it's not like I don't think I have a great memory or something it's just that I retain a few
[Guest]: very relevant examples constantly validate if I find a better example chuck the old one out
[Guest]: replace it in that's sort of like how I manage it in my head by just retaining as few pieces
[Guest]: of information as possible honestly and having enough examples to buttress those however what I
[Guest]: try to retain are memorable lines and things that make I mean that have a lot more weight than just
[Guest]: the five or six words that that they may convey those when I come across those in a book or in
[Guest]: a podcast or whatever it is I immediately stop what I'm doing and make a note of it so I don't
[Guest]: make a habit of this it's not like I have if I'm reading non-fiction for example I it's like I
[Guest]: recently read a great book I read was Farid Zakaria's 10 lessons for a post-pandemic world
[Guest]: for example I didn't make notes right I was very tempted to on the kindle so I was highlighting
[Guest]: and I got very good at figuring out whether I'm going to use something for later or whether it
[Guest]: is just an impulse oh I must save this right now like ha no yeah like I'm not going to sit and
[Guest]: worry about the reasons why the cold war whatever whatever so I'm not going to bother highlighting
[Guest]: this because I'm never going to refer back to this I always look for reusability in that sense
[Guest]: but on the other hand there was this I'm a big big fan of Scott Galloway the marketing professor
[Guest]: and also a very outspoken ex I mean I just love the way he thinks one of the beautiful lines one
[Guest]: of the best lines about branding in general that I have heard he it was a very throwaway line for
[Guest]: him that he said during some I guess on pivot with Kara Swisher and he said he was talking about how
[Guest]: Google Facebook etc are taking over our lives marketing and the decisions that we take we you
[Guest]: know we remember we retain fewer brands in our heads because Google and Facebook are where we
[Guest]: go to figure out what our favorite brand etc is and the line that he used was so brilliant I've
[Guest]: made part of my marketing presentation at least for me it was it was what is a brand a brand is
[Guest]: just a shortcut for taking a purchase decision and I thought and I just stopped when I heard
[Guest]: that because it just resonated so much I'm like yeah absolutely like if I haven't seen a Nike ad
[Guest]: in the last two years and if I need to buy a shoe I will still think Nike first because why all the
[Guest]: branding work that they've done what is the result of all that branding work they don't need to sell
[Guest]: they don't want me to buy a shoe today but eventually this fucker is going to want a shoe
[Guest]: at that point of time he should remember us similarly Volvo safe car whatever these are
[Guest]: classic examples but then it goes down to it goes down to even individuals right I know for example
[Guest]: there are some people in my friend circle who I will reach out to for a particular kind of design
[Guest]: that needs to be done so whatever personal branding they have done for themselves inadvertently or
[Guest]: whatever it is it is a shortcut for me taking a purchase decision of utilizing them for my project
[Guest]: or for a client's project or whatever it is so these kind of lines I will retain and the way I
[Guest]: try to make sure I don't forget it is by putting it in a place where I will reuse it again which
[Guest]: works in my case in terms of presentations etc the other thing that I do is I run a newsletter
[Guest]: called things of internet which is a pseudo marketing plus I just call it just general fun
[Guest]: things that happen around the internet and all that this becomes an excellent place for me to
[Guest]: save stuff and put in and retain that level of information once you put it down you tend to
[Guest]: remember it a little more these are not like fully fleshed out processes or anything like that but
[Guest]: these are the these are these are what have worked for me really at least in the spaces that I that
[Guest]: I that I work in which is primarily marketing and all that everything else right I take a call like
[Guest]: there are some things that I might read on politics is a very nice line or something but then I ask
[Guest]: myself okay am I going to reuse this again is there a point in me remembering this or should I
[Guest]: just enjoy it in the moment let it go maybe add it to one of your principles or or like does it
[Guest]: validate or invalidate anything you're thinking and then I let it go that's it I don't fall under
[Guest]: the tension that's another thing that used to give me a lot of anxiety oh I must remember each and
[Guest]: every fact and all that that bullshit I realize doesn't work anymore I don't need to what is
[Guest]: important for me at least is some of the marketing things and all that so that's really how I think
[Guest]: about this right now it's not a very satisfactory answer I know because it's not a knowledge
[Guest]: management system as such but it's what works for me and I'm happy with that yeah no it's a lovely
[Amit Varma]: answer and also you know just as when I was on episode one of getting meta we got the title of
[Amit Varma]: the show from there so I can give you a title for your book on branding if you ever write one
[Amit Varma]: and that title is eventually the fucker will want to buy your shoe yes yes that's a great title
[Unknown]: right so you know I think we've already gone over four hours of talk talk times so
[Unknown]: no apologies to you because I know you sleep at 11 30 and it's 1109 over here and you got to get
[Amit Varma]: home and all of that and you have a 7 a.m class and you've probably your your calendarization
[Guest]: for the year it's all it's a cascade effect now cascade effect now so I just may in may
[Guest]: something's going to screw up because of this yeah and you'll say yeah but this is the other
[Guest]: thing Amit I know you meant it as a joke but this is the other thing you learn to account for things
[Guest]: like this you learn to account for again like don't think that because a job you think is going
[Guest]: to take four hours per week account for those two hours extra because you will need it if not for
[Guest]: that job for something else so you know it's a constant process of trying to improve this whole
[Guest]: whole thing the idea is not to get bogged down by the process and just think about something that
[Guest]: you know works for you whatever swishes enough dopamine around in your head man whatever whatever
[Guest]: makes you happy or whatever reduces stress I think at the end of the day that's what really matters
[Guest]: even more than bank balance or whatever so whatever your definition of dopamine is optimize for it
[Amit Varma]: optimize for dopamine check facebook every minute for likes check twitter every minute for
[Guest]: okay okay fair enough optimize for dopamine and think of second order effects fair enough
[Amit Varma]: yeah okay so my final question which I ask all my guests on the show that if you had to
[Amit Varma]: recommend books to my listeners yeah books that have either changed the way you think about the
[Amit Varma]: world made a profound impact on you or which you just love so much that you want to tell everyone
[Guest]: hey this you know sure what would you recommend so I'm going to go a little I'm going to go a
[Guest]: little different over here because I'm going to recommend a couple of things that are not exactly
[Guest]: books as such but are still great reading in my mind one is this astonishingly good website called
[Guest]: rest of world rest of world.org it's a website it's a non-profit website actually the content
[Guest]: is great though reported stories on technology from around the world from markets that are not
[Guest]: silicon valley uh it was actually started by Eric Schmidt's daughter and the and the logic is great
[Guest]: because a lot of the tech journalism that we consume even here in India happens to be from
[Guest]: silicon valley and the impact that the alphabets metas etc etc of the world are doing whereas there
[Guest]: is a lot of stuff happening everywhere else as well be it the how the favelas in Brazil are using
[Guest]: uh gaming to get out of poverty or how m commerce in Africa is transforming something else be it
[Guest]: the way live streamed commerce is happening in China and Southeast Asia to how some islands are
[Guest]: using AI to preserve their ancient technologies fascinating world of technology out there so
[Guest]: if anyone's interested in tech and the internet in general rest of world.org is one of my uh
[Guest]: one of my very top recommenders coming to books I think alchemy is a great book not just for anyone
[Guest]: who works in marketing but for anyone who just thinks about the interest you know the whole
[Guest]: thing of evolution and all that my my guess is if you enjoyed uh sapiens you will enjoy this
[Guest]: book as well related to that there's another great book called this is your brain on music
[Guest]: again you don't need to be a music person to enjoy this it's a fascinating look at why humans are
[Guest]: drawn towards music because if you think about it music is evolution what role does music play from
[Guest]: an evolutionary point of view it's everything that if you have learned anything about evolution is
[Guest]: that everything that we do is for the sake of procreation of the species and music seems to
[Guest]: be a distraction from that why do we engage in music or indeed any art at all so that's another
[Guest]: ready recommendation that I have the other book that I have is a not is I'm actually going to give
[Guest]: a fiction book it's a book called some by David Eagleman if I've got his name right uh short
[Guest]: little short story little short stories yeah it's a beautiful book and it's uh it's a set of about
[Guest]: 20 short stories on what the afterlife could be like what happens after you die uh some are
[Guest]: are poignant some are surreal and funny some are uh absolutely silly uh but yeah that I think uh
[Guest]: I think that sort of like that's sort of it and the last recommendation I have is actually I'm
[Guest]: going to cheat over here I'm going to do that genie rubbing thing oh I want more wishes that
[Amit Varma]: sort of thing as many wishes recommendations as you know I'm going to recommend the entire
[Guest]: Asterix series and I think they are a great re-read for anyone of any age I think one of
[Guest]: the great things about Asterix and I uh and uh this I remember seeing somewhere Asterix can be
[Guest]: enjoyed as a child for the slapstick humor and as an adult for all the puns and all that now you
[Guest]: might be a seasoned Asterix fan thinking why is this noob coming on to seen on the unseen and
[Guest]: recommending Asterix in that case I would recommend the ultimate guide to Asterix which is an
[Guest]: astonishing book only meant for Asterix fans which breaks down the Asterix universe it breaks down
[Guest]: the character histories and all that and even goes into some of the challenges for example the
[Guest]: original Asterix is uh written in and conceptualized and written in French of course so one of the
[Guest]: challenges that translators have is not only translating the words but also the spirit and
[Guest]: now this becomes doubly difficult when you're doing puns right because now the pun needs to remain the
[Guest]: same and it needs to translate into another language so it actually has interviews with
[Guest]: Anthea Bell and Derek Hawkridge who translated the books from French to uh English uh and talk
[Guest]: about and it needs to be in that certain space that's the biggest challenge it needs to you can't
[Guest]: make the speech bubble bigger so the amount of challenges the times that they took a little
[Guest]: liberty the times they had to let a pun go all those sort of things plus other absolute gems
[Guest]: like what goes inside the magic potion and this how they do is by scoring all the Asterix books
[Guest]: and figuring out what getter fix has asked for like mistletoe over here strawberry at one point
[Guest]: of time this thing that thing whatever so this is what we know goes into the magic potion these are
[Guest]: the ingredients or whatever it is so it's an absolute delight for anyone who enjoys Asterix
[Guest]: so yeah those would be my I guess recommendations for now I did read Farid Zakaria's this year I
[Guest]: one of my favorite books was 10 lessons for a post-pandemic world which I think was nice it
[Guest]: was a very sobering read it was also very neutral read it was a strangely uplifting lead
[Guest]: read given the gravitas and the bleak subject matter it was also poignant because Farid lost
[Guest]: his mom to covid and it's also great history refresher right it was the history refresher
[Guest]: that I didn't know that I needed like oh that's what actually happened in the cold war great
[Guest]: thanks for clarifying before I sounded like an idiot you know all those nice things all put
[Guest]: together so yeah I guess these are all the things that I would recommend if you have read Sapiens
[Guest]: and I would highly recommend the graphic novel version of Sapiens which takes it to another
[Guest]: level altogether I think I should stop right now before I recommend Archie comics
[Amit Varma]: fabulous recommendations and I can't wait to dig into Asterix and these sparked off a couple of
[Amit Varma]: thoughts so a couple of sideways recommendations when you spoke about this is your brain on music
[Amit Varma]: that question that from an evolutionary point of view why is art important yeah it's one that
[Amit Varma]: Steven Pinker addresses in a chapter on art in his book The Blank Slate which is a masterpiece
[Amit Varma]: which is a desert island book for me and that's probably at the time I first read The Blank
[Amit Varma]: Slate I found it was the weakest chapter in the book the rest of the book was mind-blowing but
[Amit Varma]: nevertheless that's in comparison to what is an incredible book and also you mentioned some by
[Amit Varma]: David Eagleman and I'd like to recommend a book called Cosmicomics by Italo Calvino which again
[Amit Varma]: is a set of delightful little short stories like there's one story which is a first person account
[Amit Varma]: of an amoeba about life and there's another one where these people decide that the moon is made
[Amit Varma]: of cheese so they take a boat to the middle of the river and they try to build a ladder to the moon
[Amit Varma]: to get cheese it's got these lovely charming incredible stories by one of the great writers
[Guest]: of the last century and oh sorry one final thing I have often been asked for podcasts and newsletter
[Guest]: recommendations because I guess because I consume a few do a few so I've actually because I got
[Guest]: tired of answering this question so many times I've actually written out an entire medium post
[Guest]: of it and updated on a monthly basis so we'll link that as well that I guess would be the last link
[Guest]: of the episode which is just podcasts and newsletters that I recommend and it's just a
[Amit Varma]: whole bunch of shows and newsletters so go to the bottom of the show notes that'll be the last
[Amit Varma]: link out there and you know and this just reminded me that we missed an entire section I was going
[Amit Varma]: to ask you about podcasting and your lessons and all of that because you've done different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of podcasts yeah you know you know and in a sense you're my podcast daddy uh because of an origin
[Amit Varma]: story that people can listen to the Naren Shenoy episode 4 but for now boss Chuck thank you so much
[Guest]: for you know coming on the show this was fun I had I had no idea this much time had passed
[Guest]: and and there were times I forgot that there was a recording equipment between us
[Amit Varma]: thank you that's exactly the kind of conversation I want this is your brain on podcast
[Amit Varma]: thanks guys if you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over to the show notes where I
[Amit Varma]: think there are a record number of links enter rabbit holes at will and also listen to some great
[Amit Varma]: music while you're at it you can follow Chuck on twitter at Chuck underscore Gopal you can follow
[Amit Varma]: me on twitter at Amit Verma A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A you can browse past episodes of the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen at seen unseen dot i-n thank you for listening did you enjoy this episode of the
[Amit Varma]: scene and the unseen if so would you like to support the production of the show you can go
[Amit Varma]: over to seen unseen dot i-n slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this
[Amit Varma]: podcast alive and kicking thank you you